The Old Man and the Sea 
《老人與海》  
By Ernest Hemingway
海明威著  
He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In the first forty days a boy had been with him. But after forty days without a fish the boy’s parents had told him that the old man was now definitely and finally salao, which is the worst form of unlucky, and the boy had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish the first week. It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each day with his skiff empty and he always went down to help him carry either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that was furled around the mast. The sail was patched with flour sacks and, furled, it looked like the flag of permanent defeat.
他是一個獨自駕著小船在墨西哥灣流中捕魚的老人，如今已經連續八十四天一無所獲。在最初的四十天裡，有個男孩和他一起出海。但四十天後仍然沒捕到魚，男孩的父母告訴他，老人現在肯定是倒了大霉——「salao」，這是最不幸的狀態。於是，男孩聽從父母的命令，去了另一艘船，而那艘船在第一週就捕到了三條大魚。每天看到老人空手而歸，男孩都很難過，但他總是去幫忙，無論是搬捲起來的漁線，還是魚叉、魚鉤，以及纏在桅杆上的帆。那塊帆布用麵粉袋修補過，收起來時看起來像是一面象徵永久失敗的旗幟。  
The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his neck. The brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings from its [9] reflection on the tropic sea were on his cheeks. The blotches ran well down the sides of his face and his hands had the deep-creased scars from handling heavy fish on the cords. But none of these scars were fresh. They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert.
老人身材瘦削，脖子後面滿是深深的皺紋。他臉頰上有因熱帶海面陽光反射而引起的棕色斑點，那是善良的皮膚癌留下的痕跡。這些斑點一直蔓延到臉的兩側，而他雙手布滿了因長期拉扯沉重的魚線而留下的深深傷疤。不過，這些傷疤早已陳舊，就像荒漠裡被風沙侵蝕的痕跡，沒有一條是新的。  
Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same color as the sea and were cheerful and undefeated.
他的一切都顯得衰老，唯獨雙眼除外。那雙眼睛如海水般湛藍，明亮而且帶著無法擊敗的神采。  
“Santiago,” the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the skiff was hauled up. “I could go with you again. We’ve made some money.”
「聖地亞哥，」男孩在他們從把小船拉上岸的地方往回走時對老人說，「我可以再和你一起去，我們已經賺到一些錢了。」  
The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him.
老人曾教男孩如何捕魚，而男孩也很喜愛他。  
“No,” the old man said. “You’re with a lucky boat. Stay with them.”
「不，」老人說，「你現在和一艘幸運的船在一起，跟著他們吧。」  
“But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we caught big ones every day for three weeks.”
「可你還記得嗎？你曾經八十七天沒抓到魚，後來我們連續三個星期每天都捕到了大魚。」  
“I remember,” the old man said. “I know you did not leave me because you doubted.” 
「我記得。」老人說，「我知道你離開我不是因為你懷疑我。」  
“It was papa made me leave. I am a boy and I must obey him.”
「是爸爸叫我走的。我還是個孩子，必須聽他的話。」  
“I know,” the old man said. “It is quite normal.”
「我知道，」老人說，「這很正常。」  
“He hasn’t much faith.”
 「他沒有什麼信心。」 
[10] “No,” the old man said. “But we have. Haven’t we?”
「沒有，」老人說，「但我們有，不是嗎？」
 “Yes,” the boy said. “Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then we’ll take the stuff home.”
 「是的。」男孩說。「我請你去陽台上喝杯啤酒，然後我們再把東西帶回家。」
“Why not?” the old man said. “Between fishermen.”
「為什麼不呢？」老人說，「漁夫之間嘛。」
They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old man and he was noteangry. Others, of the older fishermen, looked at him and were sad. But they did not show it and they spoke politely about the current and the depths they had drifted their lines at and the steady good weather and of what they had seen. The successful fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their marlin out and carried them laid full length across two planks, with two men staggering at the end of each plank, to the fish house where they waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in Havana. Those who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the other side of the cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out and their flesh cut into strips for salting.
他們坐在陽台上，許多漁夫嘲笑老人，但他並不生氣。其他年長一些的漁夫看著他，心中感到難過，但他們沒有表露出來，只是禮貌地聊著洋流、水深、穩定的好天氣，以及他們看到的景象。當天捕魚成功的漁夫已經回來了，把劍魚剖開，整條魚橫放在兩塊木板上，由四個人分兩頭抬著，送到魚屋等著冰車運去哈瓦那的市場。那些抓到鯊魚的人則把鯊魚送到海灣另一側的鯊魚工廠，那裡工人用滑輪吊起鯊魚，取出肝臟，割下魚鰭，剝去魚皮，將魚肉切成條狀準備醃製。 
When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbour from the shark factory; but today there [11] was only the faint edge of the odour because the wind had backed into the north and then dropped off and it was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.
當東風吹來時，鯊魚工廠的氣味會飄過港口，但今天風向轉北，隨後又停了下來，陽台上陽光明媚，空氣中只殘留一絲淡淡的氣味。
“Santiago,” the boy said.
「聖地亞哥，」男孩說。 
“Yes,” the old man said. He was holding his glass and thinking of many years ago.
「怎麼了？」老人回答。他握著杯子，思緒回到了許多年前的事情。  
“Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?”
「我可以幫你去弄些沙丁魚，準備明天用嗎？」
“No. Go and play baseball. I can still row and Rogelio will throw the net.”
「不用了。你去打棒球吧。我還能划船，羅赫里奧會幫我撒網。」
“I would like to go. If I cannot fish with you. I would like to serve in some way.”
「我真的想幫忙。如果不能和你一起捕魚，我也想為你做點什麼。」 
“You bought me a beer,” the old man said. “You are already a man.”
「你已經請我喝了啤酒。」老人說，「你已經是個男人了。」 
“How old was I when you first took me in a boat?”
「你第一次帶我出海時，我幾歲？」  
“Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green and he nearly tore the boat to pieces. Can you remember?”
「五歲。當時我釣到的魚太活躍，幾乎把船弄散了，你差點被害死。你還記得嗎？」
“I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking and the noise of the clubbing. I can remember you throwing me into the bow where the wet coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver and the noise of you clubbing him like chopping a tree down and the sweet blood smell all over me.”
「我記得那魚尾巴拍打的聲音、船橫板斷裂的聲音，還有你用棍子打魚的聲音。我記得你把我丟到船頭那一堆濕漁線上，感覺整艘船都在顫抖，你揮棍打魚的聲音像在砍樹，那甜甜的血腥味瀰漫全身。」  
[12] “Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you?”
「你真的記得，還是我告訴過你所以才記得？」
04:25
“I remember everything from when we first went together.”
「我還記得我們第一次一起去的時候發生的一切。」  
The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes.
老人用他被曬黑的、自信而充滿愛意的眼神看著他。  
“If you were my boy I’d take you out and gamble,” he said. “But you are your father’s and your mother’s and you are in a lucky boat.”
「如果你是我的孩子，我會帶你出去賭一把，」他說。「但你是你父母的兒子，而且你現在走的是條幸運的路。」  
“May I get the sardines? I know where I can get four baits too.”
「我可以去拿沙丁魚嗎？我知道哪裡可以弄到四條餌魚。」  
“I have mine left from today. I put them in salt in the box.”
「我今天剩了一些，已經放鹽腌在盒子裡了。」  
“Let me get four fresh ones.”
「讓我去拿四條新鮮的吧。」  
“One,” the old man said. His hope and his confidence had never gone. But now they were freshening as when the breeze rises.
「一條，」老人說。他的希望和自信從未消失，但此刻像微風升起時一樣重新煥發。  
“Two,” the boy said.
「兩條，」男孩說。  
“Two,” the old man agreed. “You didn’t steal them?” 
「兩條，」老人同意了。「你沒偷來的吧？」  
“I would,” the boy said. “But I bought these.”
「我會偷的，」男孩說。「但這些是我買的。」  
“Thank you,” the old man said. He was too simple to wonder when he had attained humility. But he [13] knew he had attained it and he knew it was not disgraceful and it carried no loss of true pride.
「謝謝你，」老人說。他太單純了，不會去思考自己何時達到了謙卑的境界。但他知道自己已經達到了，而且他也明白這並不羞恥，並未失去真正的自尊。 
“Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current,” he said.
 「明天會是個好日子，這股洋流會幫我們，」他說。 
“Where are you going?” the boy asked.
 「你要去哪裡？」男孩問。 
“Far out to come in when the wind shifts. I want to be out before it is light.”
 「很遠的地方，在風改變方向之前回來。我想在天亮之前出發。」 
“I’ll try to get him to work far out,” the boy said. “Then if you hook something truly big we can come to your aid.”
 「我會試著讓他也去遠一點，」男孩說。「這樣如果你釣到什麼真正的大魚，我們可以來幫你。」
“He does not like to work too far out.”
「他不喜歡去太遠的地方。」
“No,” the boy said. “But I will see something that he cannot see such as a bird working and get him to come out after dolphin.”
「是啊，」男孩說。「但我會看到他看不見的東西，比如鳥群活動，然後引他去追海豚。」 
“Are his eyes that bad?” 
「他的眼睛真的這麼糟糕嗎？」
“He is almost blind.” 
「他幾乎瞎了。」  
“It is strange,” the old man said. “He never went turtle-ing. That is what kills the eyes.” 
「真奇怪，」老人說。「他從沒去捕過海龜。那才是害眼睛的原因。」
“But you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes are good.”
「但你在蚊子海岸捕了多年海龜，而你的眼睛卻還很好。」 
“I am a strange old man”
「我是個奇怪的老頭。」
“But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?”
「但你現在還有力氣對付真正的大魚嗎？」
“I think so. And there are many tricks.”
「我想有，而且我有很多技巧。」 
[14] “Let us take the stuff home,” the boy said. “So I can get the cast net and go after the sardines.”
「我們把東西帶回家吧，」男孩說。「這樣我就能拿鑄網去抓沙丁魚了。」 
 They picked up the gear from the boat. The old man carried the mast on his shoulder and the boy carried the wooden boat with the coiled, hard-braided brown lines, the gaff and the harpoon with its shaft. The box with the baits was under the stern of the skiff along with the club that was used to subdue the big fish when they were brought alongside. No one would steal from the old man but it was better to take the sail and the heavy lines home as the dew was bad for them and, though he was quite sure no local people would steal from him, the old man thought that a gaff and a harpoon were needless temptations to leave in a boat.
他們從船上拿起了裝備。老人把桅杆扛在肩上，男孩則拿著纏繞著結實棕色繩索的木船，還有魚鉤和帶桿的魚叉。裝著餌魚的箱子放在小艇船尾下方，旁邊還有用來制服大魚的木棒。雖然沒有人會偷老人的東西，但最好還是把帆和粗重的繩子帶回家，因為露水對它們不好。儘管老人確信當地人不會偷他的東西，但他覺得把魚鉤和魚叉留在船上無疑是一種不必要的誘惑。  
They walked up the road together to the old man’s shack and went in through its open door. The old man leaned the mast with its wrapped sail against the wall and the boy put the box and the other gear beside it. The mast was nearly as long as the one room of the shack. The shack was made of the tough budshields of the royal palm which are called guano and in it there was a bed, a table, one chair, and a place on the dirt floor to cook with charcoal. On the brown walls of the flattened, overlapping leaves of the sturdy fibered [15] guano there was a picture in color of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and another of the Virgin of Cobre. These were relics of his wife. Once there had been a tinted photograph of his wife on the wall but he had taken it down because it made him too lonely to see it and it was on the shelf in the corner under his clean shirt.
他們一起沿著路走回老人的小屋，從敞開的門進去。老人把包著帆的桅杆靠在牆上，男孩把箱子和其他裝備放在旁邊。那桅杆幾乎和小屋這間房子一樣長。小屋是用一種叫做「guano」的王棕樹葉製成的，這種葉子結實耐用。在屋內有一張床、一張桌子、一把椅子，還有一個用炭火煮飯的地方，地面上鋪的是泥土。在由展平、重疊的棕葉纖維製成的棕色牆壁上，掛著一幅彩色的耶穌聖心圖像和一幅科布雷聖母的畫。這些都是他妻子留下的遺物。牆上曾經有一張他妻子的彩色照片，但他把它取了下來，因為每次看見它都讓他感到太過孤獨，現在照片放在角落的架子上，壓在他那件乾淨的襯衫下面。  
“What do you have to eat?” the boy asked.
「你有什麼吃的？」男孩問。  
“A pot of yellow rice with fish. Do you want some?”
「一鍋魚和黃米飯。你想吃些嗎？」  
“No. I will eat at home. Do you want me to make the fire?”
「不用了，我回家吃。你要我幫你生火嗎？」  
“No. I will make it later on. Or I may eat the rice cold.”
「不用，我待會再生。或者我可能會吃冷飯。」  
“May I take the cast net?”
「我可以拿鑄網嗎？」  
“Of course.”
「當然可以。」  
There was no cast net and the boy remembered when they had sold it. But they went through this fiction every day. There was no pot of yellow rice and fish and the boy knew this too. 
其實他們沒有鑄網，男孩記得他們已經賣掉了它。但他們每天都這樣假裝著。也沒有什麼魚和黃米飯，男孩也知道這一點。  
“Eighty-five is a lucky number,” the old man said. “How would you like to see me bring one in that dressed out over a thousand pounds?” 
「八十五是一個幸運數字，」老人說。「你想不想看看我能釣到一條超過一千磅的大魚？」
“I’ll get the cast net and go for sardines. Will you sit in the sun in the doorway?”
「我去拿鑄網去抓沙丁魚。你要坐在門口曬太陽嗎？」  
[16] “Yes. I have yesterday’s paper and I will read the baseball.” The boy did not know whether yesterday’s paper was a fiction too. But the old man brought it out from under the bed.
「嗯，我有昨天的報紙，可以看棒球新聞。」男孩不知道昨天的報紙是否也是虛構的。但老人從床底下拿出了報紙。 
“Perico gave it to me at the bodega,” he explained. “I’ll be back when I have the sardines. I’ll keep yours and mine together on ice and we can share them in the morning. When I come back you can tell me about the baseball.”
「這是佩里科在雜貨店給我的，」他解釋道。「我抓到沙丁魚後會回來，我會把你的和我的一起放在冰上，明天早上我們可以一起用。等我回來，你可以跟我說棒球的消息。」
“The Yankees cannot lose.”
「洋基隊是不會輸的。」
“But I fear the Indians of Cleveland.”
「但我擔心克里夫蘭印第安人隊。」
09:45
“Have faith in the Yankees my son. Think of the great DiMaggio.”
「相信洋基隊吧，我的孩子。想想偉大的狄馬喬。」
“I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of Cleveland.”
「我害怕底特律的老虎隊和克里夫蘭的印第安人隊。」
“Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincinnati and the White Sax of Chicago.”
「小心點，否則你連辛辛那提的紅人隊和芝加哥的白襪隊也會害怕。」
“You study it and tell me when I come back.”
「你仔細研究一下，等我回來再告訴我。」
“Do you think we should buy a terminal of the lottery with an eighty-five? Tomorrow is the eighty-fifth day.” 
「你覺得我們應該買一張號碼是八十五的彩券嗎？明天是第八十五天。」
“We can do that,” the boy said. “But what about the eighty-seven of your great record?”
「我們可以這麼做。」男孩說。「但那八十七號的彩券呢？那可是你的好成績。」
[17] “It could not happen twice. Do you think you can find an eighty-five?” 
「那不會發生兩次的。你覺得你能找到八十五號嗎？」
“I can order one.
「我可以訂一張。」
“One sheet. That’s two dollars and a half. Who can we borrow that from?” 
「一張彩券要兩塊半。我們可以跟誰借那筆錢？」
“That’s easy. I can always borrow two dollars and a half.”
「那簡單，我隨時都能借到兩塊半。」
“I think perhaps I can too. But I try not to borrow. First you borrow. Then you beg.”
「我覺得我也可以。但我儘量不借。先是借錢，然後就成了乞討。」
“Keep warm old man,” the boy said. “Remember we are in September.”
「保暖點，老頭子。」男孩說。「記住，現在是九月。」
“The month when the great fish come,” the old man said. “Anyone can be a fisherman in May.”
「大魚來的月份啊。」老頭子說。「五月裡誰都可以當漁夫。」
“I go now for the sardines,” the boy said.
「我去拿沙丁魚了。」男孩說。
When the boy came back the old man was asleep in the chair and the sun was down. The boy took the old army blanket off the bed and spread it over the back of the chair and over the old man’s shoulders. They were strange shoulders, still powerful although very old, and the neck was still strong too and the creases did not show so much when the old man was asleep and his head fallen forward. His shirt had been patched so many times that it was like the sail and the patches were faded to many different shades by the sun. The [18] old man’s head was very old though and with his eyes closed there was no life in his face. The newspaper lay across his knees and the weight of his arm held it there in the evening breeze. He was barefooted.
當男孩回來時，老頭子已經在椅子上睡著了，太陽已經下山。男孩從床上拿了一條舊軍毯，蓋在椅背和老人的肩膀上。那是一雙奇特的肩膀，儘管很老，但依然有力，他的脖子也依然強壯，睡著時頭向前垂下，那些皺紋就不那麼明顯了。他的襯衫被補了很多次，像一張帆布，補丁被太陽曬得褪成了許多不同的顏色。老頭子的頭顱非常蒼老，當他閉著眼睛時，臉上顯得毫無生氣。報紙攤在他膝上，傍晚的微風中，他的手臂壓住了它。他光著腳。
The boy left him there and when he came back the old man was still asleep.
男孩離開他，等他回來時，老頭子還在睡。
“Wake up old man,” the boy said and put his hand on one of the old man’s knees.
「醒醒，老頭子。」男孩說，並將手放在老人的膝蓋上。
The old man opened his eyes and for a moment he was coming back from a long way away. Then he smiled.
老頭子睜開眼睛，有那麼一瞬間，他像是從很遠的地方回來。然後他微笑了。
“What have you got?” he asked.
「你拿了什麼？」他問。
“Supper,” said the boy. “We’re going to have supper.”
「晚餐。」男孩說。「我們要吃晚餐了。」
“I’m not very hungry.”
「我不太餓。」
“Come on and eat. You can’t fish and not eat.”
「來吃吧。你不能不吃東西就去釣魚。」
“I have,” the old man said getting up and taking the newspaper and folding it. Then he started to fold the blanket.
「我做過了。」老人說著站起來，把報紙摺好，然後開始摺毯子。
“Keep the blanket around you,” the boy said. “You’ll not fish without eating while I’m alive.”
「把毯子披在身上吧。」男孩說。「只要我還在，你就不能不吃東西就去釣魚。」
“Then live a long time and take care of yourself,” the old man said. “What are we eating?”
「那你就要長命百歲，好好照顧自己。」老人說。「我們吃什麼？」
“Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew.”
「黑豆飯、煎香蕉和一些燉菜。」
[19] The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container from the Terrace. The two sets of knives and forks and spoons were in his pocket with a paper napkin wrapped around each set.
男孩從陽台上帶來了一個雙層的金屬飯盒。兩套餐具被紙巾包著，放在他的口袋裡。
“Who gave this to you?”
「這是誰給你的？」
“Martin. The owner.”
「馬丁。那個老闆。」
“I must thank him.”
「我得謝謝他。」
“I thanked him already,” the boy said. “You don’t need to thank him.”
「我已經謝過他了。」男孩說。「你不需要再謝了。」
“I’ll give him the belly meat of a big fish,” the old man said. “Has he done this for us more than once?”
「我要送他一條大魚的魚肚肉。」老人說。「他這樣幫我們不止一次了嗎？」
“I think so.”
「我想是的。」
“I must give him something more than the belly meat then. He is very thoughtful for us.”
「那我得送他點比魚肚肉更好的東西。他對我們很關心。」
“He sent two beers.”
「他送了兩瓶啤酒。」
“I like the beer in cans best.”
「我最喜歡罐裝的啤酒。」
“I know. But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I take back the bottles.”
「我知道。不過這次是瓶裝的，是哈圖埃啤酒，我會把瓶子還回去。」
“That’s very kind of you,” the old man said. “Should we eat?”
「你真是太好了。」老人說。「我們該吃飯了嗎？」
“I’ve been asking you to,” the boy told him gently. “I have not wished to open the container until you were ready.”
「我一直在叫你吃。」男孩溫柔地說。「我只是等你準備好，才會打開飯盒。」
[20] “I’m ready now,” the old man said. “I only needed time to wash.”
「我現在準備好了。」老人說。「我只需要時間去洗一洗。」
Where did you wash? the boy thought. The village water supply was two streets down the road. I must have water here for him, the boy thought, and soap and a good towel. Why am I so thoughtless? I must get him another shirt and a jacket for the winter and some sort of shoes and another blanket.
你在哪裡洗的？男孩心想。村裡的水源在兩條街之外。我得給他準備一些水，還有肥皂和一條好的毛巾。我怎麼這麼粗心？我得給他準備另一件襯衫和一件冬天的夾克，還有一雙鞋子和另一條毯子。
13:17
“Your stew is excellent,” the old man said.
「你的燉菜真好吃。」老人說。
“Tell me about the baseball,” the boy asked him.
「跟我說說棒球的事吧。」男孩問他。
“In the American League it is the Yankees as I said,” the old man said happily.” 
「在美國聯盟裡，正如我說的，是洋基隊。」老人快樂地說。
“They lost today,” the boy told him.
「他們今天輸了。」男孩告訴他。
“That means nothing. The great DiMaggio is himself again.”
「那不算什麼。偉大的狄馬喬又找回了狀態。」
“They have other men on the team.”
「他們隊裡還有其他人。」
“Naturally. But he makes the difference. In the other league, between Brooklyn and Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn. But then I think of Dick Sisler and those great drives In the old park.”
「那是當然。但他才是關鍵。在另一個聯盟裡，布魯克林和費城之間，我必須選布魯克林。但我又想起了狄克‧希斯勒和他在舊球場那幾次驚人的全壘打。」
“There was nothing ever like them. He hits the longest ball I have ever seen.”
「那真是無與倫比。他打出了我見過最遠的球。」
“Do you remember when he used to come to the Terrace?”
「你還記得他以前來過陽台嗎？」
[21] “I wanted to take him fishing but I was too timid to ask him. Then I asked you to ask him and you were too timid.” 
「我想邀請他去釣魚，但我太膽小了，不敢開口。後來我讓你去問，你也不敢。」
“I know. It was a great mistake. He might have gone with us. Then we would have that for all of our lives.” 
「我知道。那是個很大的錯誤。他可能會跟我們一起去釣魚。那樣我們一輩子都會記得這件事。」
“I would like to take the great DiMaggio fishing,” the old man said. “They say his father was a fisherman. Maybe he was as poor as we are and would understand.” 
「我真想帶偉大的狄馬喬去釣魚。」老人說。「他們說他的父親也是個漁夫。也許他跟我們一樣窮，所以能夠理解。」
“The great Sisler’s father was never poor and he, the father, was playing in the Big Leagues when he was my age.” 
「偉大的希斯勒的父親從來不窮，而且他的父親在我這年紀的時候已經在大聯盟打球了。」
“When I was your age I was before the mast on a square rigged ship that ran to Africa and I have seen lions on the beaches in the evening.”
「在我你這個年紀的時候，我在一艘方帆船上當水手，航行到非洲，我還見過獅子在海灘上散步。」
“I know. You told me.”
「我知道。你告訴過我。」
“Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?”
「我們應該談非洲還是棒球？」
“Baseball I think,” the boy said. “Tell me about the great John J. McGraw.” He said Jota for J.
「我覺得還是談棒球吧。」男孩說。「跟我說說偉大的約翰‧J‧麥格勞吧。」他把J念成Jota。
“He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in the older days. But he was rough and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking. His mind was on horses as well as baseball. At least he carried lists of [22] horses at all times in his pocket and frequently spoke the names of horses on the telephone.”
「他以前有時也來陽台。但他喝醉時粗魯難纏，說話刻薄。他的心思在馬身上，也在棒球上。至少他的口袋裡總是放著馬匹名單，還經常在電話裡說出馬匹的名字。」
“He was a great manager,” the boy said. “My father thinks he was the greatest.”
「他是個偉大的經理人。」男孩說。「我爸爸認為他是最偉大的。」
“Because he came here the most times,” the old man said. “If Durocher had continued to come here each year your father would think him the greatest manager.”
「因為他來這裡的次數最多。」老人說。「如果杜羅歇每年都來這裡，你爸爸就會認為他是最偉大的經理人。」
“Who is the greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?” 
「誰才是真正最偉大的經理人呢，盧克還是麥克‧岡薩雷斯？」
“I think they are equal.”
「我覺得他們一樣偉大。」
“And the best fisherman is you.”
「而最棒的漁夫是你。」
“No. I know others better.”
「不，我認識其他更好的漁夫。」
“Que Va,” the boy said. “There are many good fishermen and some great ones. But there is only you.”
「不可能。」男孩說。「有很多好的漁夫，也有一些偉大的漁夫。但只有你是與眾不同的。」
“Thank you. You make me happy. I hope no fish will come along so great that he will prove us wrong.”
「謝謝你。你讓我很開心。我希望不會遇到一條如此大的魚，讓我們的想法錯得離譜。」
“There is no such fish if you are still strong as you say.”
「如果你還像你說的那麼強壯，就不會有那樣的魚。」
“I may not be as strong as I think,” the old man said. “But I know many tricks and I have resolution.” 
「我可能沒有我想的那麼強壯。」老人說。「但我知道很多技巧，而且我有決心。」
“You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in the morning. I will take the things back to the Terrace.”
「你應該現在去睡覺，這樣明天早上就能精神飽滿。我會把東西送回陽台。」
[23] “Good night then. I will wake you in the morning.” 
「那麼，晚安。我明早會叫醒你。」
“You’re my alarm clock,” the boy said.
「你是我的鬧鐘。」男孩說。
“Age is my alarm clock,” the old man said. “Why do old men wake so early? Is it to have one longer day?”
「年齡是我的鬧鐘。」老人說。「為什麼老人總是這麼早醒來？是為了擁有更長的一天嗎？」
“I don’t know,” the boy said. “All I know is that young boys sleep late and hard.” 
「我不知道。」男孩說。「我只知道年輕的男孩總是睡得晚而且沉。」
“I can remember it,” the old man said. “I’ll waken you in time.”
「我還記得。」老人說。「我會準時叫醒你。」
“I do not like for him to waken me. It is as though I were inferior.”
「我不喜歡他叫醒我。好像我比較差一點。」
“I know.”
「我知道。」
“Sleep well old man.”
「好好睡吧，老頭子。」
The boy went out. They had eaten with no light on the table and the old man took off his trousers and went to bed in the dark. He rolled his trousers up to make a pillow, putting the newspaper inside them. He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the other old newspapers that covered the springs of the bed.
男孩出去了。他們吃飯時桌上沒有點燈，老人脫下褲子，在黑暗中上床。他把褲子捲起來當枕頭，把報紙放在裡面。他用毯子裹住自己，睡在鋪著舊報紙的彈簧床上。
He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a boy and the long golden beaches and the white beaches, so white they hurt your eyes, and the high capes and the great brown mountains. He lived along that coast now every night and in his dreams he heard the surf roar and saw the native boats [24] come riding through it. He smelled the tar and oakum of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of Africa that the land breeze brought at morning.
他很快就睡著了，夢見自己年輕時在非洲，那裡有長長的金色海灘和白色的沙灘，白得讓人眼睛疼，還有高聳的海角和雄偉的棕色山脈。他每晚都在那片海岸上生活，在夢中聽到海浪的轟鳴聲，看到當地的船隻乘著浪前行。他睡著時聞到了甲板上的焦油和纖維的氣味，也聞到了晨風吹來的非洲土地的氣息。
Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke up and dressed to go and wake the boy. But tonight the smell of the land breeze came very early and he knew it was too early in his dream and went on dreaming to see the white peaks of the Islands rising from the sea and then he dreamed of the different harbours and roadsteads of the Canary Islands.
通常當他聞到這股晨風吹來的氣息時，他就會醒來，穿上衣服去叫醒男孩。但今晚，這股氣息來得太早，他在夢裡知道還太早，於是繼續夢見那些從海上升起的白色山峰，然後他夢見了加那利群島不同的港口和停泊處。
He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor of great occurrences, nor of great fish, nor fights, nor contests of strength, nor of his wife. He only dreamed of places now and of the lions on the beach. They played like young cats in the dusk and he loved them as he loved the boy. He never dreamed about the boy. He simply woke, looked out the open door at the moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on. He urinated outside the shack and then went up the road to wake the boy. He was shivering with the morning cold. But he knew he would shiver himself warm and that soon he would be rowing.
他不再夢見風暴、女人、重大事件、大魚、戰鬥、力量比拼，甚至不再夢見他的妻子。他現在只夢見那些地方和海灘上的獅子。那些獅子在黃昏中像小貓一樣玩耍，他愛它們，就像他愛那個男孩一樣。他從不夢見男孩。他只是醒來，看著敞開的門外的月亮，然後解開褲子穿上。他走出小屋，在外面小便，接著順著路走去叫醒男孩。他在清晨的寒意中顫抖，但他知道很快就會暖和起來，因為不久他就會開始划船了。
18:37
The door of the house where the boy lived was unlocked and he opened it and walked in quietly with his [25] bare feet. The boy was asleep on a cot in the first room and the old man could see him clearly with the light that came in from the dying moon. He took hold of one foot gently and held it until the boy woke and turned and looked at him. The old man nodded and the boy took his trousers from the chair by the bed and, sitting on the bed, pulled them on.
男孩住的那棟房子的門沒鎖，老人輕輕推開門，赤腳走了進去。男孩睡在第一間房裡的一張簡易床上，透過殘月的光，老人能清楚地看到他。他輕輕抓住男孩的一隻腳，握著直到男孩醒來並轉頭看著他。老人點了點頭，男孩便從床邊的椅子上拿起褲子，坐在床上穿上。
The old man went out the door and the boy came after him. He was sleepy and the old man put his arm across his shoulders and said, “I am sorry.”
老人走出了門，男孩跟在他後面。他還有些困倦，老人把手臂搭在他的肩上說：「對不起。」
“Qua Va,” the boy said. “It is what a man must do.”
「這沒什麼。」男孩說。「這是男人該做的事。」
They walked down the road to the old man’s shack and all along the road, in the dark, barefoot men were moving, carrying the masts of their boats.
他們沿著路走向老人的小屋，一路上，黑暗中有許多赤腳的人在走動，扛著船的桅杆。
When they reached the old man’s shack the boy took the rolls of line in the basket and the harpoon and gaff and the old man carried the mast with the furled sail on his shoulder.
當他們到達老人的小屋時，男孩拿起籃子裡的繩索捲、魚叉和漁鉤，而老人則扛著帶著收起的帆的桅杆在肩上。
“Do you want coffee?” the boy asked.
「你要喝咖啡嗎？」男孩問。
“We’ll put the gear in the boat and then get some.”
「我們先把裝備放到船上，再去喝吧。」
They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an early morning place that served fishermen.
他們在一個為漁夫提供服務的早點攤，用煉乳罐裝的咖啡喝了起來。
“How did you sleep old man?” the boy asked. He [26] was waking up now although it was still hard for him to leave his sleep.
「你睡得怎麼樣，老頭子？」男孩問。他現在已經清醒了一些，儘管還是很難完全脫離睡意。
“Very well, Manolin,” the old man said. “I feel confident today.”
「很好，馬諾林。」老人說。「今天我感覺很有信心。」
“So do I,” the boy said. “Now I must get your sardines and mine and your fresh baits. He brings our gear himself. He never wants anyone to carry anything.”
「我也是。」男孩說。「現在我得去拿你的沙丁魚和我的，以及你的新鮮餌料。他總是自己拿裝備，他從不讓別人幫忙。」
“We’re different,” the old man said. “I let you carry things when you were five years old.”
「我們不一樣。」老人說。「你五歲的時候我就讓你幫忙拿東西了。」
“I know it,” the boy said. “I’ll be right back. Have another coffee. We have credit here.”
「我知道。」男孩說。「我馬上就回來。再喝杯咖啡吧。我們在這裡有賒帳。」
He walked off, bare-footed on the coral rocks, to the ice house where the baits were stored.
他赤腳走在珊瑚石上，去放餌料的冰屋。
The old man drank his coffee slowly. It was all he would have all day and he knew that he should take it. For a long time now eating had bored him and he never carried a lunch. He had a bottle of water in the bow of the skiff and that was all he needed for the day.
老人慢慢地喝著他的咖啡。這是他一整天唯一的東西，他知道應該喝下它。長久以來，吃東西讓他覺得無趣，他從不帶午餐。他在小艇的船頭放了一瓶水，那就是他一天所需要的全部。
The boy was back now with the sardines and the two baits wrapped in a newspaper and they went down the trail to the skiff, feeling the pebbled sand under their feet, and lifted the skiff and slid her into the water.
男孩現在帶著沙丁魚和兩個用報紙包著的餌料回來了，他們沿著小路走向小艇，腳下感覺到碎石沙地的觸感。他們一起抬起小艇，把它滑進水中。
[27] “Good luck old man.”
「祝你好運，老頭子。」
“Good luck,” the old man said. He fitted the rope lashings of the oars onto the thole pins and, leaning forward against the thrust of the blades in the water, he began to row out of the harbour in the dark. There were other boats from the other beaches going out to sea and the old man heard the dip and push of their oars even though he could not see them now the moon was below the hills.
「祝你好運。」老人說。他把槳的繩索牢牢綁在槳孔上，然後向前傾身，對抗著水中槳葉的推力，開始在黑暗中划出港口。其他海灘的小船也在出海，老人雖然看不見它們，但能聽到槳划水的聲音，因為月亮已經落到山後。
Sometimes someone would speak in a boat. But most of the boats were silent except for the dip of the oars. They spread apart after they were out of the mouth of the harbour and each one headed for the part of the ocean where he hoped to find fish. The old man knew he was going far out and he left the smell of the land behind and rowed out into the clean early morning smell of the ocean. He saw the phosphorescence of the Gulf weed in the water as he rowed over the part of the ocean that the fishermen called the great well because there was a sudden deep of seven hundred fathoms where all sorts of fish congregated because of the swirl the current made against the steep walls of the floor of the ocean. Here there were concentrations of shrimp and bait fish and sometimes schools of squid in the deepest holes and these rose close to the surface at night where all the wandering fish fed on them.
有時有人會在船上說話，但大多數船都是沉默的，只有槳入水的聲音。出港後，它們便各自分散，向著各自希望找到魚的海域進發。老人知道他要划得很遠，他離開了陸地的氣味，划進了清新的晨間海洋氣息。他看見海面上的磷光，來自那些海藻的光芒。當他划過漁夫們稱作「大井」的海域時，他知道這裡的海床突然陡降七百尋，各種魚類因洋流在陡壁上產生的漩渦而聚集在此。這裡蝦類和餌魚集中，有時還有成群的魷魚在深水洞中，夜裡它們會浮到表層，供徘徊的魚群捕食。
In the dark the old man could feel the morning coming and as he rowed he heard the trembling sound as flying fish left the water and the hissing that their stiff set wings made as they soared away in the darkness. He was very fond of flying fish as they were his principal friends on the ocean. He was sorry for the birds, especially the small delicate dark terns that were always flying and looking and almost never finding, and he thought, the birds have a harder life than we do except for the robber birds and the heavy strong ones. Why did they make birds so delicate and fine as those sea swallows when the ocean can be so cruel? She is kind and very beautiful. But she can be so cruel and it comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and hunting, with their small sad voices are made too delicately for the sea.
在黑暗中，老人能感受到黎明的來臨，他划著船，聽見飛魚跳出水面時那顫抖的聲音，還有它們硬挺的翅膀在黑暗中滑翔時發出的嘶嘶聲。他非常喜歡飛魚，因為它們是他在海上的主要朋友。他對那些鳥兒感到難過，尤其是那些小而纖細的黑色燕鷗，它們總是在飛行和搜尋，卻幾乎總是找不到東西。他想，鳥兒的生活比我們更艱難，除了那些強壯的搶奪者和體型大的鳥類。為什麼會造出如此纖細又精緻的海燕，而海洋卻可以如此殘忍？她是溫柔而美麗的，但她也可以如此殘酷，而且變得殘酷是如此突然。那些小鳥在飛翔、俯衝、覓食，發出悲哀的聲音，它們被造得如此纖細，實在不適合這片大海。
He always thought of the sea as la mar which is what people call her in Spanish when they love her. Sometimes those who love her say bad things of her but they are always said as though she were a woman. Some of the younger fishermen, those who used buoys as floats for their lines and had motorboats, bought [29] when the shark livers had brought much money, spoke of her as el mar which is masculine. They spoke of her as a contestant or a place or even an enemy. But the old man always thought of her as feminine and as something that gave or withheld great favours, and if she did wild or wicked things it was because she could not help them. The moon affects her as it does a woman, he thought.
他總是把海想作「la mar」，就像那些在西班牙語裡愛著她的人一樣。有時，那些愛她的人也會說她的壞話，但總是像在說一位女人。一些年輕的漁夫，那些用浮標來固定釣線並擁有馬達船的漁夫，因為賣鯊魚肝賺了很多錢，他們稱她為「el mar」，這是陽性的。他們把她當作一名對手、一個場所，甚至是一個敵人。但老人總是把她想作一個女性，是一個給予或保留大恩惠的存在，如果她做了狂野或邪惡的事情，那是因為她無法控制這一切。他想，月亮對她的影響就像對一個女人的影響一樣。
He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him since he kept well within his speed and the surface of the ocean was flat except for the occasional swirls of the current. He was letting the current do a third of the work and as it started to be light he saw he was already further out than he had hoped to be at this hour.
他穩定地划著，這對他來說並不費力，因為他一直保持在自己的速度範圍內，而且海面平靜，只有偶爾有水流的漩渦。他讓水流承擔了三分之一的工作。天開始亮了，他發現自己已經划得比預計時間到達的位置更遠了。
24:19
I worked the deep wells for a week and did nothing, he thought. Today I’ll work out where the schools of bonito and albacore are and maybe there will be a big one with them. Before it was really light he had his baits out and was drifting with the current. One bait was down forty fathoms. The second was at seventy-five and the third and fourth were down in the blue water at one [30] hundred and one hundred and twenty-five fathoms. Each bait hung head down with the shank of the hook inside the bait fish, tied and sewed solid and all the projecting part of the hook, the curve and the point, was covered with fresh sardines. Each sardine was hooked through both eyes so that they made a half-garland on the projecting steel. There was no part of the hook that a great fish could feel which was not sweet smelling and good tasting.
我在那些深井水域工作了一週，什麼也沒收穫，他想道。今天我要去找鰹魚和長鰭鮪的魚群，或許它們之間會有一條大魚。在天還沒有完全亮之前，他已經把餌料放好了，隨著洋流漂動。一個餌在四十尋深的地方，第二個在七十五尋深，第三和第四個則在更深的藍水區，分別在一百尋和一百二十五尋的深度。每一個餌都是頭朝下掛著，魚鉤的柄插在餌魚的體內，緊密綁住並縫合好，鉤子的彎曲部分和尖端都被新鮮的沙丁魚覆蓋。每條沙丁魚都是從兩眼穿過，使得它們像半環狀地掛在外露的鋼鉤上。鉤子的任何部分，大魚都無法察覺到，只有甜美的氣味和好吃的味道。
The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or albacores, which hung on the two deepest lines like plummets and, on the others, he had a big blue runner and a yellow jack that had been used before; but they were in good condition still and had the excellent sardines to give them scent and attractiveness. Each line, as thick around as a big pencil, was looped onto a green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on the bait would make the stick dip and each line had two forty-fathom coils which could be made fast to the other spare coils so that, if it were necessary, a fish could take out over three hundred fathoms of line.
男孩給了他兩條新鮮的小金槍魚或長鰭鮪，它們像鉛墜一樣掛在兩條最深的釣線上，而在其他釣線上，則掛著一條大藍鰺和一條黃尾鰺，這些魚之前使用過，但仍然狀況良好，並且有新鮮的沙丁魚增添香氣和吸引力。每條釣線都粗得像一支大鉛筆，被繞在一根蘸過綠樹汁的木棍上，這樣任何拉動或碰觸餌料的動作都會使木棍下沉，每條釣線都備有兩卷四十尋長的線圈，如果需要，可以與其他備用線圈連接，這樣一條魚就可以拉出超過三百尋的線。
Now the man watched the dip of the three sticks over the side of the skiff and rowed gently to keep the [31] lines straight up and down and at their proper depths. It was quite light and any moment now the sun would rise.
此時，老人注視著小艇兩側三根木棍的擺動，輕輕地划著船，以保持釣線垂直並位於適當的深度。天已經亮了，隨時太陽都可能升起。
The sun rose thinly from the sea and the old man could see the other boats, low on the water and well in toward the shore, spread out across the current. Then the sun was brighter and the glare came on the water and then, as it rose clear, the flat sea sent it back at his eyes so that it hurt sharply and he rowed without looking into it. He looked down into the water and watched the lines that went straight down into the dark of the water. He kept them straighter than anyone did, so that at each level in the darkness of the stream there would be a bait waiting exactly where he wished it to be for any fish that swam there. Others let them drift with the current and sometimes they were at sixty fathoms when the fishermen thought they were at a hundred.
太陽從海上緩緩升起，老人看見其他的船，低伏在水面上，靠近岸邊，沿著洋流散布開來。隨後太陽變得更亮，光芒映在水面上，當太陽完全升起時，平靜的海面反射的光刺痛了他的眼睛，他便避開直視太陽，繼續划著。他低頭望著水中垂直下沉的釣線，這些釣線比任何人的都更直，這樣在海流的黑暗中，每一個深度都有一個餌料準確地等待著他希望遇到的魚群。其他人讓釣線隨洋流漂動，有時他們以為釣線在一百尋深，但實際上卻只在六十尋深的地方。
But, he thought, I keep them with precision. Only I have no luck any more. But who knows? Maybe today. Every day is a new day. It is better to be lucky. But I would rather be exact. Then when luck comes you are ready.
但他心想，我保持著精確。只是我不再有運氣了。但誰知道呢？或許今天運氣會來臨。每天都是新的一天。擁有運氣是更好的，但我寧願做到精確。這樣當運氣來臨時，你就已經準備好了。
The sun was two hours higher now and it did not [32] hurt his eyes so much to look into the east. There were only three boats in sight now and they showed very low and far inshore.
太陽已經升高了兩個小時，現在直視東方不再那麼刺眼。此刻只有三艘船還在視線內，它們看起來低伏且靠近岸邊。
All my life the early sun has hurt my eyes, he thought. Yet they are still good. In the evening I can look straight into it without getting the blackness. It has more force in the evening too. But in the morning it is painful.
我一生中，早晨的陽光總是刺痛我的眼睛，他想。但我的眼睛依然很好。到了晚上，我能直接看著太陽而不覺得眼前變黑。到了晚上，它的光線也更強，但早晨的光線讓人疼痛。
Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long black wings circling in the sky ahead of him. He made a quick drop, slanting down on his back-swept wings, and then circled again.
就在這時，他看見一隻軍艦鳥在他前方的天空盤旋，它那長長的黑色翅膀展開，快速俯衝下來，翅膀向後傾斜，然後再次盤旋起來。
“He’s got something,” the old man said aloud. “He’s not just looking.”
「牠有東西了，」老人大聲說道。「牠不只是隨便找找。」
He rowed slowly and steadily toward where the bird was circling. He did not hurry and he kept his lines straight up and down. But he crowded the current a little so that he was still fishing correctly though faster than he would have fished if he was not trying to use the bird.
他慢慢地、穩定地朝著那隻盤旋的鳥划去。他不著急，並保持釣線垂直。但他稍微靠近了洋流，這樣雖然划得比平時快一點，但仍然能正確地釣魚，畢竟他在利用那隻鳥的動向。
The bird went higher in the air and circled again, his wings motionless. Then he dove suddenly and the old man saw flying fish spurt out of the water and sail desperately over the surface.
那隻鳥飛得更高了，然後再次盤旋，翅膀一動不動。接著，牠突然俯衝，老人看見飛魚從水中噴出，拚命地在水面上滑行。
[33] “Dolphin,” the old man said aloud. “Big dolphin.”
「海豚，」老人大聲說。「大海豚。」
He shipped his oars and brought a small line from under the bow. It had a wire leader and a medium-sized hook and he baited it with one of the sardines. He let it go over the side and then made it fast to a ring bolt in the stern. Then he baited another line and left it coiled in the shade of the bow. He went back to rowing and to watching the long-winged black bird who was working, now, low over the water.
他把槳收起來，從船頭底下取出一條小釣線。釣線上有一條鋼絲引線和一個中型魚鉤，他用一條沙丁魚來作餌，把釣線放到水邊，然後把它固定在船尾的環狀螺栓上。接著，他又準備了另一條釣線，將它盤在船頭的陰涼處。他回到划船的位置，繼續划著船，同時注視著那隻長翅黑鳥，牠此時正在水面上低飛捕食。
As he watched the bird dipped again slanting his wings for the dive and then swinging them wildly and ineffectually as he followed the flying fish. The old man could see the slight bulge in the water that the big dolphin raised as they followed the escaping fish. The dolphin were cutting through the water below the flight of the fish and would be in the water, driving at speed, when the fish dropped. It is a big school of dolphin, he thought. They are widespread and the flying fish have little chance. The bird has no chance. The flying fish are too big for him and they go too fast.
他看著那隻鳥再次俯衝，斜著翅膀準備下潛，然後牠的翅膀瘋狂地拍打，追逐著飛魚，但成效不大。老人可以看到水中微微的隆起，那是大海豚追逐逃跑的魚群時所掀起的波紋。這些海豚在飛魚的下方切割水面，當飛魚落水時，牠們將以極快的速度追擊。這是一大群海豚，他想。牠們散佈得很廣，而飛魚幾乎沒有機會逃脫。那隻鳥更是沒希望了。飛魚對牠來說太大了，游得也太快。
He watched the flying fish burst out again and again and the ineffectual movements of the bird. That school has gotten away from me, he thought. They are moving out too fast and too far. But perhaps I will pick up [34] a stray and perhaps my big fish is around them. My big fish must be somewhere.
他看著飛魚一遍又一遍地衝出水面，看到鳥兒徒勞無功地掙扎。這群海豚已經遠離我了，他想。牠們移動得太快，離得也太遠了。但也許我能撿到一條落單的，也許我的大魚就在牠們附近。我的大魚一定在某個地方。
The clouds over the land now rose like mountains and the coast was only a long green line with the gray blue hills behind it. The water was a dark blue now, so dark that it was almost purple. As he looked down into it he saw the red sifting of the plankton in the dark water and the strange light the sun made now. He watched his lines to see them go straight down out of sight into the water and he was happy to see so much plankton because it meant fish. The strange light the sun made in the water, now that the sun was higher, meant good weather and so did the shape of the clouds over the land. But the bird was almost out of sight now and nothing showed on the surface of the water but some patches of yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed and the purple, formalized, iridescent, gelatinous bladder of a Portuguese man-of-war floating dose beside the boat. It turned on its side and then righted itself. It floated cheerfully as a bubble with its long deadly purple filaments trailing a yard behind it in the water.
此刻，陸地上方的雲層像山峰般升起，海岸線只是一條長長的綠線，背後是灰藍色的山丘。海水現在變得深藍，幾乎呈現紫色。他低頭望著水中，看到黑暗水域中漂浮的紅色浮游生物，還有太陽在水中投射的奇異光線。看到釣線筆直地沉入水中，他感到高興，因為這裡有大量的浮游生物，這意味著有魚。太陽升得更高時，在水中產生的奇異光線，意味著好天氣，而陸地上的雲形也預示著好天氣。但那隻鳥幾乎已經消失在視線中，而水面上只有一些被太陽曬白的黃色馬尾藻和一隻紫色的、帶有金屬光澤的葡萄牙戰艦水母的膠狀囊體漂浮在船旁。它翻了一個身，然後又恢復原狀。它像泡泡一樣快樂地漂浮著，長長的、致命的紫色絲狀物在水中拖出了一碼多長的距離。
“Agua mala,” the man said. “You whore.”
「Agua mala（壞水），」老人說。「你這個婊子。」
30:50
From where he swung lightly against his oars he looked down into the water and saw the tiny fish that [35] were coloured like the trailing filaments and swam between them and under the small shade the bubble made as it drifted. They were immune to its poison. But men were not and when same of the filaments would catch on a line and rest there slimy and purple while the old man was working a fish, he would have welts and sores on his arms and hands of the sort that poison ivy or poison oak can give. But these poisonings from the agua mala came quickly and struck like a whiplash.
他輕輕地擺動著槳，低頭望向水中，看到那些小魚在葡萄牙戰艦水母的絲狀物之間游動，它們的顏色和那些紫色的絲狀物一樣，在氣泡投下的陰影下穿梭。這些小魚對毒性免疫，但人類卻不行。當有些絲狀物纏繞在釣線上時，它們會滑溜溜地、紫色地停留在那裡，而當老人正在處理魚時，他的手臂和手上會出現像毒葛或毒橡給的那種紅疹和潰瘍。但是這些「壞水」的毒素來得快，就像鞭子抽打一樣迅猛。
The iridescent bubbles were beautiful. But they were the falsest thing in the sea and the old man loved to see the big sea turtles eating them. The turtles saw them, approached them from the front, then shut their eyes so they were completely carapaced and ate them filaments and all. The old man loved to see the turtles eat them and he loved to walk on them on the beach after a storm and hear them pop when he stepped on them with the horny soles of his feet.
那閃耀著虹彩的氣泡十分美麗，但它們是海中最虛偽的東西，老人喜歡看著大海龜吃掉它們。海龜看見它們，從正面接近，然後閉上眼睛，使整個龜殼封閉起來，然後連帶絲狀物一起吞食。老人喜歡看海龜吃掉它們，也喜歡在風暴過後走在沙灘上，踩著它們，用他腳底的硬繭踩破時聽到的「啪」聲。
He loved green turtles and hawk-bills with their elegance and speed and their great value and he had a friendly contempt for the huge, stupid loggerheads, yellow in their armour-plating, strange in their [36] love-making, and happily eating the Portuguese men-of-war with their eyes shut.
他喜愛綠海龜和玳瑁龜，因為它們的優雅和速度以及它們的巨大價值；但他對那些龜甲呈黃色的巨型笨拙的平頭龜卻抱有一種友善的輕蔑，它們在奇怪的交配行為中表現得愚蠢，而且總是閉著眼睛快樂地吞食葡萄牙戰艦水母。
He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats for many years. He was sorry for them all, even the great trunk backs that were as long as the skiff and weighed a ton. Most people are heartless about turtles because a turtle’s heart will beat for hours after he has been cut up and butchered. But the old man thought, I have such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs. He ate the white eggs to give himself strength. He ate them all through May to be strong in September and October for the truly big fish.
儘管他多年來乘坐捕龜船，但他對海龜並沒有什麼神秘的感情。他對所有的海龜都心存憐憫，甚至包括那些龜殼像小艇般長、重達一噸的巨型龜。大多數人對海龜無情，因為即使被宰殺後，海龜的心臟仍然會跳動好幾個小時。可是老人心想，我也有那樣的一顆心，我的手和腳和牠們一樣粗糙。他吃白色的龜蛋來增加力量。五月份他會一直吃，這樣在九月和十月真正大魚來的時候他就會有力氣。
He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from the big drum in the shack where many of the fishermen kept their gear. It was there for all fishermen who wanted it. Most fishermen hated the taste. But it was no worse than getting up at the hours that they rose and it was very good against all colds and grippes and it was good for the eyes.
他每天也會在棚屋裡的大桶裡喝一杯鯊魚肝油，許多漁夫把他們的裝備放在那裡。這些油是為所有需要的漁夫準備的。大多數漁夫討厭它的味道，但它並不比早起的辛苦更難忍受，而且對預防感冒和流感很有效，對眼睛也很好。
Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird was circling again.
此時，老人抬頭看見那隻鳥又在盤旋。
“He’s found fish,” he said aloud. No flying fish broke the surface and there was no scattering of bait [37] fish. But as the old man watched, a small tuna rose in the air, turned and dropped head first into the water. The tuna shone silver in the sun and after he had dropped back into the water another and another rose and they were jumping in all directions, churning the water and leaping in long jumps after the bait. They were circling it and driving it.
「牠找到魚了，」他大聲說道。沒有飛魚破水，也沒有餌魚散開的跡象。但老人盯著看時，一條小金槍魚突然跳出水面，轉了個身，頭朝下扎回水中。金槍魚在陽光下閃爍著銀光，落水後，另一條又跳了起來，接著又是一條，牠們四處跳動，激起白浪，長距離跳躍追逐餌魚。牠們在圍繞著餌魚，將它們趕到水面。
If they don’t travel too fast I will get into them, the old man thought, and he watched the school working the water white and the bird now dropping and dipping into the bait fish that were forced to the surface in their panic.
如果牠們的速度不太快，我就能接近它們，老人想著，他注視著那群魚把水面攪成白色，而鳥兒此時正在俯衝、啄食那些驚慌中被逼上水面的餌魚。
“The bird is a great help,” the old man said. Just then the stern line came taut under his foot, where he had kept a loop of the line, and he dropped his oars and felt tile weight of the small tuna’s shivering pull as he held the line firm and commenced to haul it in. The shivering increased as he pulled in and he could see the blue back of the fish in the water and the gold of his sides before he swung him over the side and into the boat. He lay in the stern in the sun, compact and bullet shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring as he thumped his life out against the planking of the boat with the quick shivering strokes of his neat, fast-moving [38] tail. The old man hit him on the head for kindness and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade of the stern.
「這隻鳥幫了大忙，」老人說道。就在這時，船尾的釣線在他腳下繃緊了，他保持釣線的一個圈在腳下，隨即放下槳，感受到小金槍魚的顫抖拉力。他穩穩地抓住釣線，開始收回。當他拉近時，顫抖的力度加強了，他能看見水中魚的藍背和金黃的側面，於是他把它提到船邊，然後放進了船裡。那魚躺在船尾的陽光下，緊實而呈子彈形，大大的、呆滯的眼睛瞪著，牠用快速顫動的尾巴拍打著船板，發出一陣急促的響聲。老人為了讓它好過一點，打了牠的頭一下，然後將牠踢到船尾的陰涼處，牠的身體還在顫抖著。
“Albacore,” he said aloud. “He’ll make a beautiful bait. He’ll weigh ten pounds.”
「長鰭金槍魚，」他大聲說道。「牠會是一個絕佳的餌魚，牠重十磅。」
He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was by himself. He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he had sung at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in the smacks or in the turtle boats. He had probably started to talk aloud, when alone, when the boy had left. But he did not remember. When he and the boy fished together they usually spoke only when it was necessary. They talked at night or when they were storm-bound by bad weather. It was considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea and the old man had always considered it so and respected it. But now he said his thoughts aloud many times since there was no one that they could annoy.
他已不記得自己何時開始在獨處時自言自語了。過去他獨自一人時曾經唱過歌，有時在小型漁船或捕龜船上值夜班時，他也會在夜晚唱歌。或許是在那男孩離開之後，他才開始自言自語，但他已經不記得了。當他和男孩一起出海打魚時，他們通常只在必要時才交談。晚上或是被壞天氣困在船上時，他們才會說話。在海上，保持沉默被視為一種美德，老人一直認為如此並尊重這種習慣。但現在，沒有人會被他的話語打擾，所以他常常把自己的想法大聲說出來。
“If the others heard me talking out loud they would think that I am crazy,” he said aloud. “But since I am not crazy, I do not care. And the rich have radios to talk to them in their boats and to bring them the baseball.”
「如果其他人聽見我這樣自言自語，他們會覺得我瘋了，」他大聲說道。「但既然我沒有瘋，我也不在乎。而富人們在船上有收音機可以和他們對話，還能收聽棒球賽。」
[39] Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought. Now is the time to think of only one thing. That which I was born for. There might be a big one around that school, he thought. I picked up only a straggler from the albacore that were feeding. But they are working far out and fast. Everything that shows on the surface today travels very fast and to the north-east. Can that be the time of day? Or is it some sign of weather that I do not know?
「現在不是想棒球的時候，」他心想。「現在只能想著一件事，那就是我生來為之的事。」他心想，也許在這群魚中有一條大魚。我只是從那些在覓食的長鰭金槍魚中挑到了一條落單的，但牠們遠在外海且游得很快。今天水面上的一切都游得很快，向東北移動。這是因為時辰的關係？還是某些我不懂的天氣徵兆？
He could not see the green of the shore now but only the tops of the blue hills that showed white as though they were snow-capped and the clouds that looked like high snow mountains above them. The sea was very dark and the light made prisms in the water. The myriad flecks of the plankton were annulled now by the high sun and it was only the great deep prisms in the blue water that the old man saw now with his lines going straight down into the water that was a mile deep.
現在他已看不見岸邊的綠色，只能看到那藍色山脈的頂部，看起來像覆蓋著白雪，還有高聳如雪山的雲。海水顯得非常深暗，陽光在水中形成了棱鏡的效果。隨著太陽升高，無數的浮游生物的斑點消失不見，老人現在只能看到在深藍水域中隨著釣線向下延伸的巨大深海棱鏡。
The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that species tuna and only distinguished among them by their proper names when they came to sell them or to trade them for baits, were down again. The sun was [40] hot now and the old man felt it on the back of his neck and felt the sweat trickle down his back as he rowed.
漁民們將這一類的魚統稱為金槍魚，只有在出售或交換餌魚時才會根據正確的名字來區分牠們。那些金槍魚又潛回水中了。現在太陽正烈，老人感覺到太陽炙烤著他的後頸，汗水順著背部滑落，他繼續划槳。
I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight of line around my toe to wake me. But today is eighty-five days and I should fish the day well.
「我可以就這樣漂著，」他心想，「小睡一下，然後把釣線繞過我的腳趾，好讓我醒來。但今天是第八十五天，我應該好好地釣完這一天。」
Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the projecting green sticks dip sharply.
正在這時，他注視著釣線，看到其中一根突出的綠色樁子猛然一沉。
“Yes,” he said. “Yes,” and shipped his oars without bumping the boat. He reached out for the line and held it softly between the thumb and forefinger of his right hand. He felt no strain nor weight and he held the line lightly. Then it came again. This time it was a tentative pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was. One hundred fathoms down a marlin was eating the sardines that covered the point and the shank of the hook where the hand-forged hook projected from the head of the small tuna.
「是的，」他說。「是的。」他放好槳，小心不讓船撞到。他伸手抓住釣線，輕輕地用右手的拇指和食指夾住。沒有感覺到張力或重量，他輕輕地握住釣線。然後，那股力量又來了。這次是一個試探性的拉扯，不是實在的重量，他清楚這是什麼。在一百尋深的水下，一條槍魚正在啃食覆蓋著鉤尖和鉤柄的沙丁魚，而那隻手工打造的魚鉤從小金槍魚的頭部突出來。
38:03
The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with his left hand, unleashed it from the stick. Now he could let it run through his fingers without the fish feeling any tension.
老人輕柔地用左手握住釣線，輕輕地將它從樁子上放開。現在，他可以讓釣線在指尖之間滑動，而魚卻感受不到任何張力。
This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought. Eat them, fish. Eat them. Please eat them.
「在這麼遠的地方，這條魚一定很大，」他心想。「吃掉它們吧，魚。吃掉它們。拜託，吃掉它們。」
[41] How fresh they are and you down there six hundred feet in that cold water in the dark. Make another turn in the dark and come back and eat them. He felt the light delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a sardine’s head must have been more difficult to break from the hook. Then there was nothing.
「它們是多麼新鮮啊，而你卻在六百英尺深的寒冷黑水裡。再轉一圈，回來吃掉它們。」他感受到輕微的拉扯，然後是更大的拉扯，顯然是沙丁魚的頭更難從鉤子上脫落。然後就什麼都沒有了。
“Come on,” the old man said aloud. “Make another turn. Just smell them. Aren’t they lovely? Eat them good now and then there is the tuna. Hard and cold and lovely. Don’t be shy, fish. Eat them.”
「來吧，」老人大聲說道。「再轉一圈。聞聞它們的味道。它們不是很可口嗎？現在好好吃掉它們，然後就是金槍魚。堅硬而寒冷，卻又可口。不要害羞，魚。吃掉它們。」
He waited with the line between his thumb and his finger, watching it and the other lines at the same time for the fish might have swum up or down. Then came the same delicate pulling touch again.
他用拇指和食指夾著釣線，等待著，眼睛同時注視著這根線和其他的線，因為魚可能游到了上面或下面。然後又感受到相同的輕微拉扯。
“He’ll take it,” the old man said aloud. “God help him to take it.”
「牠會咬的，」老人大聲說道。「上帝保佑牠能咬住。」
He did not take it though. He was gone and the old man felt nothing.
不過牠並沒有咬住，牠消失了，老人什麼也感覺不到。
“He can’t have gone,” he said. “Christ knows he can’t have gone. He’s making a turn. Maybe he has been hooked before and he remembers something of it.
「牠不可能已經走了，」他說。「天主知道牠不可能已經走了。牠在轉彎。也許牠以前被鉤住過，還記得些什麼。」
[42] Then he felt the gentle touch on the line and he was happy.
然後他感受到線上的輕柔觸感，心中感到快樂。
“It was only his turn,” he said. “He’ll take it.”
「只是牠的轉彎而已，」他說。「牠會咬的。」
He was happy feeling the gentle pulling and then he felt something hard and unbelievably heavy. It was the weight of the fish and he let the line slip down, down, down, unrolling off the first of the two reserve coils. As it went down, slipping lightly through the old man’s fingers, he still could feel the great weight, though the pressure of his thumb and finger were almost imperceptible. “What a fish,” he said. “He has it sideways in his mouth now and he is moving off with it.”
他因為感受到輕柔的拉扯而高興，然後感覺到某種硬而無法置信的沉重。那是魚的重量，他讓釣線往下滑，滑過兩個備用卷中的第一個。當它下滑時，輕輕滑過老人的手指，他依然能感受到那巨大的重量，儘管拇指和食指的壓力幾乎無法察覺。「多麼大的魚，」他說。「牠現在把魚嘴側著，正在游走。」
Then he will turn and swallow it, he thought. He did not say that because he knew that if you said a good thing it might not happen. He knew what a huge fish this was and he thought of him moving away in the darkness with the tuna held crosswise in his mouth. At that moment he felt him stop moving but the weight was still there. Then the weight increased and he gave more line. He tightened the pressure of his thumb and finger for a moment and the weight increased and was going straight down.
「然後牠會轉身吞下去，」他心想。他沒有這樣說，因為他知道如果說了好話，可能就不會發生。他知道這條魚是多麼巨大，並想著牠在黑暗中游走，嘴裡含著金槍魚。就在那一刻，他感覺到牠停下了，但重量仍然在那裡。然後重量增加，他給了更多的線。他暫時加強了拇指和食指的壓力，重量增加了，並且一直向下。
[43] “He’s taken it,” he said. “Now I’ll let him eat it well.”
「牠已經咬住了，」他說。「現在我會讓牠好好吃。」
He let the line slip through his fingers while he reached down with his left hand and made fast the free end of the two reserve coils to the loop of the two reserve coils of the next line. Now he was ready. He had three forty-fathom coils of line in reserve now, as well as the coil he was using.
他讓釣線在手指間滑動，同時用左手向下伸，將兩個備用卷的自由端固定在另一條線的備用卷的環圈上。現在他準備好了。他現在有三個四十尋的備用卷，還有他正在使用的那一卷。
“Eat it a little more,” he said. “Eat it well.”
「再吃一點，」他說。「好好吃下去。」
Eat it so that the point of the hook goes into your heart and kills you, he thought. Come up easy and let me put the harpoon into you. All right. Are you ready? Have you been long enough at table?
吃到鉤尖插入你的心臟，讓你死去，他心想。輕鬆地浮上來，讓我把魚叉刺進你裡面。好了，準備好了嗎？在桌子上待的夠久了嗎？
“Now!” he said aloud and struck hard with both hands, gained a yard of line and then struck again and again, swinging with each arm alternately on the cord with all the strength of his arms and the pivoted weight of his body.
「現在！」他大聲喊道，雙手用力一擊，拉出一碼的釣線，然後又一次又一次地揮擊，兩隻手交替用力，充分發揮他的臂力和身體的重心。
Nothing happened. The fish just moved away slowly and the old man could not raise him an inch. His line was strong and made for heavy fish and he held it against his hack until it was so taut that beads of water were jumping from it. Then it began to make a slow hissing sound in the water and he still held it, bracing [44] himself against the thwart and leaning back against the pull. The boat began to move slowly off toward the north-west.
什麼也沒發生。魚只是慢慢游開，老人卻無法將牠抬起一寸。他的釣線很強，專門針對大魚，他將釣線緊緊抵在背部，直到線緊繃得水珠從上面彈起。然後，它在水中開始發出低沉的嘶嘶聲，他仍然緊握著釣線，靠在槳座上，身子向後傾以抵抗拉力。小船慢慢朝西北方向移動。
The fish moved steadily and they travelled slowly on the calm water. The other baits were still in the water but there was nothing to be done.
魚穩定地游動，他們在平靜的水面上緩慢前進。其他的餌魚還在水裡，但也無法做什麼。
“I wish I had the boy” the old man said aloud. “I’m being towed by a fish and I’m the towing bitt. I could make the line fast. But then he could break it. I must hold him all I can and give him line when he must have it. Thank God he is travelling and not going down.”
「我真希望有那個小孩，」老人大聲說。「我被魚拖著，而我是拖著的桩。我可以把釣線固定住。但那樣牠可能會把它扯斷。我必須盡量穩住牠，並在牠需要的時候放線。感謝上帝，牠在前進，而不是往下游。」
What I will do if he decides to go down, I don’t know. What I’ll do if he sounds and dies I don’t know. But I’ll do something. There are plenty of things I can do.
如果牠決定下潛，我該怎麼辦，我不知道。如果牠下潛並死去，我該怎麼辦我也不知道。但我一定會想辦法。還有很多事情我可以做。
He held the line against his back and watched its slant in the water and the skiff moving steadily to the north-west.
他把釣線抵在背部，注視著水中的角度，小船穩定地朝西北航行。
This will kill him, the old man thought. He can’t do this forever. But four hours later the fish was still swimming steadily out to sea, towing the skiff, and the old man was still braced solidly with the line across his back.
這會讓牠筋疲力盡，老人想。牠不可能這樣一直持續下去。但四小時後，魚仍然穩定地向海裡游，拖著小船，老人仍然緊緊靠著釣線。
[45] “It was noon when I hooked him,” he said. “And I have never seen him.”
「我在中午時候鉤住牠，」他說。「而我從未見過牠。」
He had pushed his straw hat hard down on his head before he hooked the fish and it was cutting his forehead. He was thirsty too and he got down on his knees and, being careful not to jerk on the line, moved as far into the bow as he could get and reached the water bottle with one hand. He opened it and drank a little. Then he rested against the bow. He rested sitting on the un-stepped mast and sail and tried not to think but only to endure.
他在鉤住魚之前把草帽緊緊地壓在頭上，帽子壓得他額頭疼痛。他也渴了，於是跪下，盡量不去晃動釣線，盡可能地向船頭移動，用一隻手拿到水瓶。他打開瓶子喝了一點。然後他靠在船頭休息。他坐在未立起的桅杆和帆上，試著不去思考，只是忍耐。
Then he looked behind him and saw that no land was visible. That makes no difference, he thought. I can always come in on the glow from Havana. There are two more hours before the sun sets and maybe he will come up before that. If he doesn’t maybe he will come up with the moon. If he does not do that maybe he will come up with the sunrise. I have no cramps and I feel strong. It is he that has the hook in his mouth. But what a fish to pull like that. He must have his mouth shut tight on the wire. I wish I could see him. I wish I could see him only once to know what I have against me.
然後他回頭看，發現沒有任何陸地可見。「這沒有關係，」他想。「我總能靠著哈瓦那的微光回去。還有兩小時，太陽就要下山了，也許牠會在那之前浮上來。如果牠不浮上來，或許牠會在月亮出來時浮上來。如果牠不這樣做，或許牠會在日出時浮上來。我沒有抽筋，感覺很好。是牠嘴裡有鉤子。但這條魚竟然這樣拉著我。牠一定是緊緊地閉著嘴巴抓著那根金屬絲。我真希望我能看到牠。我希望我能看見牠一次，知道我面對的是什麼。」
The fish never changed his course nor his direction [46] all that night as far as the man could tell from watching the stars. It was cold after the sun went down and the old man’s sweat dried cold on his back and his arms and his old legs. During the day he had taken the sack that covered the bait box and spread it in the sun to dry. After the sun went down he tied it around his neck so that it hung down over his back and he cautiously worked it down under the line that was across his shoulders now. The sack cushioned the line and he had found a way of leaning forward against the bow so that he was almost comfortable. The position actually was only somewhat less intolerable; but he thought of it as almost comfortable.
魚整晚都沒有改變航向或方向，這是老人從觀察星星所能判斷的。太陽下山後變得寒冷，老人的汗水在背部、手臂和腿上乾得發冷。在白天，他把覆蓋餌箱的麻袋摊開在陽光下晾乾。太陽下山後，他把麻袋系在脖子上，讓它垂在背後，然後小心翼翼地將它放到肩上的釣線下。麻袋緩衝了釣線，他找到了一種前傾靠著船頭的姿勢，讓自己幾乎感到舒適。這個姿勢實際上只是稍微不那麼難受；但他認為這幾乎是舒適的。
I can do nothing with him and he can do nothing with me, he thought. Not as long as he keeps this up.
「我無法對付他，他也無法對付我，」他想。「只要他這樣保持下去就行。」
Once he stood up and urinated over the side of the skiff and looked at the stars and checked his course. The line showed like a phosphorescent streak in the water straight out from his shoulders. They were moving more slowly now and the glow of Havana was not so strong, so that he knew the current must be carrying them to the eastward. If I lose the glare of Havana we must be going more to the eastward, he thought. For if the fish’s course held true I must see it for many more [47] hours. I wonder how the baseball came out in the grand leagues today, he thought. It would be wonderful to do this with a radio. Then he thought, think of it always. Think of what you are doing. You must do nothing stupid.
有一次，他站起來，越過小船側面小便，抬頭看著星星並檢查航向。釣線在水中顯得像一條磷光的痕跡，筆直地從他的肩膀延伸出去。現在他們的速度變得更慢，哈瓦那的光芒不再那麼強烈，因此他知道水流一定把他們帶到了東邊。「如果我失去哈瓦那的光芒，我們一定是朝著東方前進，」他想。「如果魚的航向保持不變，我必須再看到它好幾個小時。我想知道今天大聯盟的棒球比賽結果如何，」他想。「如果能用無線電收聽那就太好了。」然後他想，「永遠不要忘記這點。想想你正在做什麼。你必須避免任何愚蠢的行為。」
Then he said aloud, “I wish I had the boy. To help me and to see this.”
然後他大聲說：「我希望我有那個小孩來幫我，來看看這一切。」
No one should be alone in their old age, he thought. But it is unavoidable. I must remember to eat the tuna before he spoils in order to keep strong. Remember, no matter how little you want to, that you must eat him in the morning. Remember, he said to himself.
「沒有人應該在老年時獨自一人，」他想。「但這是不可避免的。我必須記得在鮪魚變壞之前吃掉它，以保持強壯。記住，無論你多麼不想，你都必須在早上吃掉它。記住，」他告訴自己。
During the night two porpoises came around the boat and he could hear them rolling and blowing. He could tell the difference between the blowing noise the male made and the sighing blow of the female.
夜裡，兩隻海豚游到船邊，他能聽到牠們翻滾和噴氣的聲音。他能分辨出雄性發出的噴氣聲和雌性輕柔的嘆息聲。
“They are good,” he said. “They play and make jokes and love one another. They are our brothers like the flying fish.”
「牠們很好，」他說。「牠們玩耍、開玩笑並彼此相愛。牠們是像飛魚一樣的兄弟。」
Then he began to pity the great fish that he had hooked. He is wonderful and strange and who knows how old he is, he thought. Never have I had such a strong fish nor one who acted so strangely. Perhaps he is too wise to jump. He could ruin me by jumping or [48] by a wild rush. But perhaps he has been hooked many times before and he knows that this is how he should make his fight. He cannot know that it is only one man against him, nor that it is an old man. But what a great fish he is and what will he bring in the market if the flesh is good. He took the bait like a male and he pulls like a male and his fight has no panic in it. I wonder if he has any plans or if he is just as desperate as I am?
然後他開始憐憫他所鉤住的巨大魚。「牠真是奇妙而神秘，誰知道牠有多大年紀，」他想。「我從來沒有遇到過這麼強壯的魚，或者如此奇怪的魚。或許牠太聰明而不會跳起來。牠可以透過跳躍或猛烈的衝刺毀了我。但是或許牠以前被鉤住過很多次，知道這是牠應該如何掙扎。牠不可能知道這只是與一個人對抗，也不知道這是一位老人。但牠真是一條偉大的魚，如果肉質很好，牠在市場上能帶來什麼？牠像雄性一樣吞下餌料，像雄性一樣用力拉扯，牠的掙扎中沒有驚慌。我想知道牠是否有計劃，還是跟我一樣絕望？」
47:42
He remembered the time he had hooked one of a pair of marlin. The male fish always let the female fish feed first and the hooked fish, the female, made a wild, panic-stricken, despairing fight that soon exhausted her, and all the time the male had stayed with her, crossing the line and circling with her on the surface. He had stayed so close that the old man was afraid he would cut the line with his tail which was sharp as a scythe and almost of that size and shape. When the old man had gaffed her and clubbed her, holding the rapier bill with its sandpaper edge and dubbing her across the top of her head until her colour turned to a colour almost like the backing of mirrors, and then, with the boy’s aid, hoisted her aboard, the male fish had stayed by the side of the boat. Then, while the old man was clearing the lines and preparing the harpoon, [49] the male fish jumped high into the air beside the boat to see where the female was and then went down deep, his lavender wings, that were his pectoral fins, spread wide and all his wide lavender stripes showing. He was beautiful, the old man remembered, and he had stayed.
他想起曾經鉤住一對馬林魚中的一條的時候。雄魚總是讓雌魚先進食，而被鉤住的雌魚拼命掙扎，驚慌失措，最後累得不行，而雄魚一直陪在她身邊，時而交錯著釣線，時而在水面上繞著她。牠靠得如此之近，以至於老人擔心牠會用像鐮刀一樣鋒利的尾巴割斷釣線，牠的尾巴幾乎就是那樣的形狀和大小。當老人用魚叉把她撈起來並用棍子擊打她，握住那把有砂紙邊緣的長嘴，直到她的顏色變成幾乎像鏡子背面的顏色，然後在小孩的幫助下將她拖上船時，雄魚仍然停在船邊。接著，在老人清理釣線和準備魚叉的時候，雄魚跳到船旁高高地躍起，看看雌魚在哪裡，然後向下潛去，牠的薰衣草色鰭，亦即胸鰭，張得很開，所有的薰衣草色條紋都顯示出來。老人記得牠是多麼美麗，牠就這樣停留在那裡。
That was the saddest thing I ever saw with them, the old man thought. The boy was sad too and we begged her pardon and butchered her promptly.
「這是我見過的與牠們在一起時最悲傷的事情，」老人想。「那個小孩也很傷心，我們向她道歉，隨即將她處理掉。」
“I wish the boy was here,” he said aloud and settled himself against the rounded planks of the bow and felt the strength of the great fish through the line he held across his shoulders moving steadily toward whatever he had chosen.
「我希望那個小孩在這裡，」他大聲說，並靠在船頭圓弧的木板上，感受到那條巨魚透過他肩上拉著的釣線，穩穩地朝著牠所選擇的方向移動。
When once, through my treachery, it had been necessary to him to make a choice, the old man thought.
「有一次，因為我的背叛，牠不得不做出選擇，」老人想。
His choice had been to stay in the deep dark water far out beyond all snares and traps and treacheries. My choice was to go there to find him beyond all people. Beyond all people in the world. Now we are joined together and have been since noon. And no one to help either one of us.
「牠的選擇是在遠離所有陷阱和陰險的深暗水域中待著。我的選擇則是去那裡，在所有人之上找到牠。在世界上所有人之上。現在我們已經在一起，自中午以來就一直如此，卻沒有人能幫助我們中的任何一個。」
Perhaps I should not have been a fisherman, he thought. But that was the thing that I was born for. I must surely remember to eat the tuna after it gets light.
「或許我不該當漁夫，」他想。「但這正是我出生的目的。我必須記得在天亮後吃掉鮪魚。」
[50] Some time before daylight something took one of the baits that were behind him. He heard the stick break and the line begin to rush out over the gunwale of the skiff. In the darkness he loosened his sheath knife and taking all the strain of the fish on his left shoulder he leaned back and cut the line against the wood of the gunwale. Then he cut the other line closest to him and in the dark made the loose ends of the reserve coils fast. He worked skillfully with the one hand and put his foot on the coils to hold them as he drew his knots tight. Now he had six reserve coils of line. There were two from each bait he had severed and the two from the bait the fish had taken and they were all connected.
天亮之前的某個時刻，什麼東西鉤住了他身後的一個餌。他聽見木棒斷裂，釣線開始急速地在小船的槳邊滑出。在黑暗中，他鬆開了護身刀，將魚的重量壓在左肩，向後傾斜並用木頭的槳邊切斷釣線。然後，他切斷了距離他最近的另一條釣線，並在黑暗中把備用線圈的鬆端固定好。他一隻手熟練地操作，並把腳放在線圈上以固定它們，然後拉緊結。他現在有六個備用的釣線圈。每個他切斷的餌都有兩條，而被魚吞下的餌也有兩條，這些都是相連的。
After it is light, he thought, I will work back to the forty-fathom bait and cut it away too and link up the reserve coils. I will have lost two hundred fathoms of good Catalan cardel and the hooks and leaders. That can be replaced. But who replaces this fish if I hook some fish and it cuts him off?
「等天亮後，」他想，「我會回到四十噚的餌那裡，切斷它並連接備用線圈。我將損失二百噚的好加泰羅尼亞釣線和鉤子及引導線。這是可以替換的。但是如果我再鉤住什麼魚，牠把他割斷了，那麼誰來替換這條魚呢？」
I don’t know what that fish was that took the bait just now. It could have been a marlin or a broadbill or a shark. I never felt him. I had to get rid of him too fast.
「我不知道剛才那條魚是什麼。它可能是馬林魚、劍魚或鯊魚。我根本沒有感覺到牠。我必須太快地擺脫牠。」
Aloud he said, “I wish I had the boy.”
他大聲說：「我希望我有那個小孩。」
[51] But you haven’t got the boy, he thought. You have only yourself and you had better work back to the last line now, in the dark or not in the dark, and cut it away and hook up the two reserve coils.
「但你沒有那個小孩，」他想。「你只有你自己，現在最好趕快回到最後一條釣線，無論是在黑暗中還是在光明下，將它切斷並接上兩個備用的釣線圈。」
So he did it. It was difficult in the dark and once the fish made a surge that pulled him down on his face and made a cut below his eye. The blood ran down his cheek a little way. But it coagulated and dried before it reached his chin and he worked his way back to the bow and rested against the wood. He adjusted the sack and carefully worked the line so that it came across a new part of his shoulders and, holding it anchored with his shoulders, he carefully felt the pull of the fish and then felt with his hand the progress of the skiff through the water.
於是他這麼做了。在黑暗中這很困難，曾經有一次魚猛衝過來，讓他面朝下摔倒，並在眼下割了一道傷口。血順著他的臉頰流下來了一點。但在血到達他的下巴之前，它已經凝固並乾了。他艱難地回到船頭，靠著木頭休息。他調整了袋子，小心翼翼地將釣線放在肩膀的新位置上，並用肩膀將其固定，然後仔細感受魚的拉力，再用手感受小船在水中的移動。
I wonder what he made that lurch for, he thought. The wire must have slipped on the great hill of his back. Certainly his back cannot feel as badly as mine does. But he cannot pull this skiff forever, no matter how great he is. Now everything is cleared away that might make trouble and I have a big reserve of line; all that a man can ask.
「我想他為什麼要這樣一陣猛衝，」他想。「釣線一定是在他那巨大背部的坡度上滑動了。肯定他的背部感覺不會像我的這麼痛。但不管他多厲害，他不可能永遠拉著這條小船。現在所有可能造成麻煩的東西都已經清理掉了，我有一大堆備用的釣線；這是人所能要求的一切。」
“Fish,” he said softly, aloud, “I’ll stay with you until I am dead.”
「魚，」他輕聲地大聲說，「我會陪著你，直到我死去。」
[52] He’ll stay with me too, I suppose, the old man thought and he waited for it to be light. It was cold now in the time before daylight and he pushed against the wood to be warm. I can do it as long as he can, he thought. And in the first light the line extended out and down into the water. The boat moved steadily and when the first edge of the sun rose it was on the old man’s right shoulder.
「我想他也會陪著我，」老人想著，等待天亮。黎明前的時候很冷，他推著木頭取暖。「我能做到，只要他也能做到，」他想。當第一縷光亮出現時，釣線伸展出來，向下延伸進水中。小船穩定地移動著，當第一道陽光升起時，它正好在老人的右肩上。
“He’s headed north,” the old man said. The current will have set us far to the eastward, he thought. I wish he would turn with the current. That would show that he was tiring.
「他朝北游，」老人說。「水流會把我們往東推得很遠，」他想。「我希望他能隨著水流轉身。那樣就表示他在疲憊。」
When the sun had risen further the old man realized that the fish was not tiring. There was only one favorable sign. The slant of the line showed he was swimming at a lesser depth. That did not necessarily mean that he would jump. But he might.
當陽光升得更高時，老人意識到魚並沒有疲憊。只有一個好徵兆。釣線的角度顯示牠在較淺的水層游動。這並不一定意味著牠會跳。但牠可能會。
“God let him jump,” the old man said. “I have enough line to handle him.”
「上帝讓牠跳，」老人說。「我有足夠的釣線來處理牠。」
Maybe if I can increase the tension just a little it will hurt him and he will jump, he thought. Now that it is daylight let him jump so that he’ll fill the sacks along his backbone with air and then he cannot go deep to die.
「也許如果我能稍微增加一點緊繃感，會讓牠痛苦，牠就會跳起來，」他想。「現在已經天亮了，讓牠跳起來，這樣牠就會在脊背的袋子裡充滿空氣，然後牠就無法深潛而死。」
[53] He tried to increase the tension, but the line had been taut up to the very edge of the breaking point since he had hooked the fish and he felt the harshness as he leaned back to pull and knew he could put no more strain on it. I must not jerk it ever, he thought. Each jerk widens the cut the hook makes and then when he does jump he might throw it. Anyway I feel better with the sun and for once I do not have to look into it.
他試著增加緊繃感，但自從他鉤住那條魚以來，釣線就已經緊繃到了幾乎要斷的邊緣。他感受到那股強烈的壓力，向後傾斜試著拉，但知道自己再也無法施加更多的力量。「我絕對不能猛拉，」他想。「每一下猛拉都會擴大鉤子造成的傷口，然後當牠跳起來時，可能會把釣線甩掉。不管怎樣，我在陽光下感覺好些，這一次我不必朝著陽光看。」
There was yellow weed on the line but the old man knew that only made an added drag and he was pleased. It was the yellow Gulf weed that had made so much phosphorescence in the night.
釣線上有黃色的海藻，但老人知道這只是增加了阻力，他很高興。這是使夜間產生如此多磷光的黃色墨西哥海藻。
“Fish,” he said, “I love you and respect you very much. But I will kill you dead before this day ends.”
「魚，」他說，「我非常愛你，尊敬你。但我會在今天結束之前將你殺死。」
54:23
Let us hope so, he thought.
讓我們這麼希望，他想。
A small bird came toward the skiff from the north. He was a warbler and flying very low over the water. The old man could see that he was very tired. The bird made the stern of the boat and rested there. Then he flew around the old man’s head and rested on the line where he was more comfortable. “How old are you?” the old man asked the bird. “Is this your first trip?”
一隻小鳥從北方朝小船飛來。牠是一隻鳴鳥，飛得非常低，掠過水面。老人可以看出牠非常疲憊。小鳥飛到船尾休息，然後在老人的頭上繞了繞，落在釣線上，這樣牠會覺得更舒適。「你幾歲了？」老人問小鳥。「這是你的第一次旅行嗎？」
[54] The bird looked at him when he spoke. He was too tired even to examine the line and he teetered on it as his delicate feet gripped it fast.
當他說話時，小鳥看著他。牠疲憊得甚至無法檢查釣線，輕巧的腳緊緊抓住釣線，搖搖欲墜。
“It’s steady,” the old man told him. “It’s too steady. You shouldn’t be that tired after a windless night. What are birds coming to?”
「這釣線很穩，」老人告訴牠。「太穩了。你不該在沒有風的夜晚這麼疲倦。鳥兒們怎麼了？」
The hawks, he thought, that come out to sea to meet them. But he said nothing of this to the bird who could not understand him anyway and who would learn about the hawks soon enough.
他想到了那些出海來與他們會合的鷹。但他並沒有對這隻小鳥提起這些，反正牠也聽不懂，牠會很快知道那些鷹的事。
“Take a good rest, small bird,” he said. “Then go in and take your chance like any man or bird or fish.”
「小鳥，好好休息，」他說。「然後像任何人、任何鳥或魚一樣進去冒險。」
It encouraged him to talk because his back had stiffened in the night and it hurt truly now.
他鼓勵自己跟小鳥交談，因為他的背在夜裡僵硬了，現在真的很痛。
“Stay at my house if you like, bird,” he said. “I am sorry I cannot hoist the sail and take you in with the small breeze that is rising. But I am with a friend.”
「如果你願意，可以待在我家，鳥兒，」他說。「我很抱歉無法揚起帆，讓你隨著這微弱的微風進去。但我和一位朋友在一起。」
Just then the fish gave a sudden lurch that pulled the old man down onto the bow and would have pulled him overboard if he had not braced himself and given some line.
就在這時，魚突然一陣猛拉，讓老人摔倒在船頭，如果他沒有穩住自己並放出一些釣線，就會被拉下船。
The bird had flown up when the line jerked and the old man had not even seen him go. He felt the line [55] carefully with his right hand and noticed his hand was bleeding.
小鳥在釣線一拉的時候飛了起來，老人甚至沒有看到牠飛走。他用右手小心地感受釣線，注意到自己的手在流血。
“Something hurt him then,” he said aloud and pulled back on the line to see if he could turn the fish. But when he was touching the breaking point he held steady and settled back against the strain of the line.
「那麼，牠一定是受傷了，」他大聲說，然後拉回釣線，看看能不能轉動魚。但當他觸及斷線的邊緣時，他保持穩定，倚靠在釣線的拉力上。
“You’re feeling it now, fish,” he said. “And so, God knows, am I.”
「你現在感受到這一點了，魚，」他說。「而且，上帝知道，我也感受到了。」
He looked around for the bird now because he would have liked him for company. The bird was gone.
他現在四處尋找那隻小鳥，因為他想要牠作伴。小鳥不見了。
You did not stay long, the man thought. But it is rougher where you are going until you make the shore. How did I let the fish cut me with that one quick pull he made? I must be getting very stupid. Or perhaps I was looking at the small bird and thinking of him. Now I will pay attention to my work and then I must eat the tuna so that I will not have a failure of strength.
「你沒有待太久，」老人想。「但在你要去的地方會更加惡劣，直到你抵達岸邊。我怎麼會讓魚用那一下猛拉割傷我呢？我一定變得很愚蠢。或許是我在看著那隻小鳥，想著牠。現在我得專心工作，然後我必須吃掉那條鮪魚，以免力氣不足。」
“I wish the boy were here and that I had some salt,” he said aloud.
「我希望那個小孩在這裡，還有我有一些鹽，」他大聲說。
Shifting the weight of the line to his left shoulder and kneeling carefully he washed his hand in the ocean and held it there, submerged, for more than a [56] minute watching the blood trail away and the steady movement of the water against his hand as the boat moved.
將釣線的重量轉移到左肩上，他小心地跪下，將手浸入海洋中，並在水中保持了超過一分鐘，目不轉睛地看著血液漂流而去，和隨著小船移動而不斷流動的水面。
“He has slowed much,” he said.
「牠的速度減慢了很多，」他說。
The old man would have liked to keep his hand in the salt water longer but he was afraid of another sudden lurch by the fish and he stood up and braced himself and held his hand up against the sun. It was only a line burn that had cut his flesh. But it was in the working part of his hand. He knew he would need his hands before this was over and he did not like to be cut before it started.
老人想把手在鹽水裡泡久一點，但他擔心魚會突然猛拉，所以站起來，穩住身體，將手舉向陽光。這只是一道擦傷，割破了他的肉。但傷口在他手的活動部分。他知道在這一切結束之前，他需要用到雙手，不喜歡在開始之前就受傷。
“Now,” he said, when his hand had dried, “I must eat the small tuna. I can reach him with the gaff and eat him here in comfort.”
「現在，」他說，當手乾了以後，「我必須吃掉這條小鮪魚。我可以用撈魚叉把牠拉過來，這樣在這裡就可以舒服地吃了。」
He knelt down and found the tuna under the stem with the gaff and drew it toward him keeping it clear of the coiled lines. Holding the line with his left shoulder again, and bracing on his left hand and arm, he took the tuna off the gaff hook and put the gaff back in place. He put one knee on the fish and cut strips of dark red meat longitudinally from the back of the head to the tail. They were wedge-shaped strips and he cut [57] them from next to the back bone down to the edge of the belly. When he had cut six strips he spread them out on the wood of the bow, wiped his knife on his trousers, and lifted the carcass of the bonito by the tail and dropped it overboard.
他跪下，找到鮪魚，將撈魚叉拉向自己，並確保釣線不會纏繞在一起。再次用左肩穩住釣線，並用左手和左臂支撐，他將鮪魚從撈魚叉上取下，然後將撈魚叉放回原位。他用一隻膝蓋壓住魚身，從魚頭到尾部割下深紅色的肉條。這些肉條是楔形的，他從魚脊旁邊開始切割，直到腹部的邊緣。當他切下六條肉條後，他將它們攤在船頭的木板上，用褲子擦拭刀子，然後抓住鮪魚的尾巴將它的屍體扔進海裡。
“I don’t think I can eat an entire one,” he said and drew his knife across one of the strips. He could feel the steady hard pull of the line and his left hand was cramped. It drew up tight on the heavy cord and he looked at it in disgust.
「我想我無法吃完整條，」他說，並將刀子劃過一條肉條。他能感受到釣線的穩定拉力，左手感到痙攣。這隻手緊緊地收縮在重線上，他厭惡地看著它。
“What kind of a hand is that,” he said. “Cramp then if you want. Make yourself into a claw. It will do you no good.”
「這是什麼樣的手，」他說。「那就痙攣吧，如果你想。變成一隻爪子也沒有用。」
Come on, he thought and looked down into the dark water at the slant of the line. Eat it now and it will strengthen the hand. It is not the hand’s fault and you have been many hours with the fish. But you can stay with him forever. Eat the bonito now.
快點， 他想，低頭看著水中釣線的斜度。現在就吃掉它，這會讓手變強。這不是手的錯，你和魚在一起已經好幾個小時了。但你可以永遠和牠在一起。現在就吃掉鮪魚。
He picked up a piece and put it in his mouth and chewed it slowly. It was not unpleasant.
他撿起一塊肉放進嘴裡，慢慢咀嚼。味道並不難吃。
Chew it well, he thought, and get all the juices. It would not be had to eat with a little lime or with lemon or with salt.
好好咀嚼， 他想，將所有的汁液都嚼出來。搭配一點青檸或檸檬，或是鹽來吃，這並不難。
“How do you feel, hand?” he asked the cramped [58] hand that was almost as stiff as rigor mortis. “I’ll eat some more for you.”
「感覺怎麼樣，手？」他問那隻幾乎僵硬得像死後僵直的手。「我會再為你吃一些。」
He ate the other part of the piece that he had cut in two. He chewed it carefully and then spat out the skin.
他吃掉了自己剛切的另一部分。他仔細咀嚼，然後將魚皮吐了出來。
“How does it go, hand? Or is it too early to know?”
「怎麼樣，手？還是說太早無法知道？」 
He took another full piece and chewed it.
他又拿起一整塊肉，開始咀嚼。
59:55
“It is a strong full-blooded fish,” he thought. “I was lucky to get him instead of dolphin. Dolphin is too sweet. This is hardly sweet at all and all the strength is still in it.”
「這是一條強壯而純種的魚，」他想。「我很幸運能捕到牠，而不是海豚。海豚太甜了。這條魚幾乎沒有甜味，裡面還保留著所有的力量。」
There is no sense in being anything but practical though, he thought. I wish I had some salt. And I do not know whether the sun will rot or dry what is left, so I had better eat it all although I am not hungry. The fish is calm and steady. I will eat it all and then I will be ready.
不過，他想，這樣的想法毫無意義，還是要實事求是。我希望我有些鹽。而且我不知道陽光會使剩下的部分腐爛還是乾燥，因此我最好把它全部吃掉，儘管我不餓。魚很平靜而穩定。我會把它吃完，然後準備好。
“Be patient, hand,” he said. “I do this for you.”
「耐心點，手，」他說。「我這樣做是為了你。」
I wish I could feed the fish, he thought. He is my brother. But I must kill him and keep strong to do it. Slowly and conscientiously he ate all of the wedge-shaped strips of fish.
我希望我能餵魚，他想。牠是我的兄弟。但我必須殺了牠，並保持強壯來做到這一點。他慢慢而認真地吃掉了所有楔形的魚肉條。
He straightened up, wiping his hand on his trousers. “Now,” he said. “You can let the cord go, hand, and I will handle him with the right arm alone until you [59] stop that nonsense.” He put his left foot on the heavy line that the left hand had held and lay back against the pull against his back.
他伸直身子，用褲子擦了擦手。「現在，」他說。「你可以放開這根線，手，我會用右臂單獨處理牠，直到你停止這些無謂的舉動。」他將左腳放在左手握住的粗繩上，背靠在拉扯的力量上。
“God help me to have the cramp go,” he said. “Because I do not know what the fish is going to do.”
「上帝幫助我讓痙攣消失，」他說。「因為我不知道魚要做什麼。」
But he seems calm, he thought, and following his plan. But what is his plan, he thought. And what is mine? Mine I must improvise to his because of his great size. If he will jump I can kill him. But he stays down forever. Then I will stay down with him forever.
但牠似乎很平靜，他想，並按照他的計劃行事。但是他的計劃是什麼呢，他想。我的計劃是根據牠的巨大體型即興而成。如果牠跳起來，我可以殺掉牠。但牠永遠不會跳。那我就會永遠與牠一同沉下去。
He rubbed the cramped hand against his trousers and tried to gentle the fingers. But it would not open. Maybe it will open with the sun, he thought. Maybe it will open when the strong raw tuna is digested. If I have to have it, I will open it, cost whatever it costs. But I do not want to open it now by force. Let it open by itself and come back of its own accord. After all I abused it much in the night when it was necessary to free and untie the various lines.
他用褲子擦拭痙攣的手，試著讓手指放鬆。但手不肯張開。也許在陽光下會打開，他想。也許在強壯的生鮪魚被消化之後會張開。如果我需要的話，我會強行打開它，不惜一切代價。但我不想現在強迫它打開。讓它自己打開，自然回來。畢竟，當我在夜裡必須解開和鬆開各種釣線時，我對它的虐待很多。
He looked across the sea and knew how alone he was now. But he could see the prisms in the deep dark water and the line stretching ahead and the strange undulation of the calm. The clouds were building up now for the trade wind and he looked ahead and saw a [60] flight of wild ducks etching themselves against the sky over the water, then blurring, then etching again and he knew no man was ever alone on the sea.
他望向海面，知道自己現在有多孤獨。但他能看到深邃黑暗水中的棱鏡，和延伸向前的釣線，以及平靜的奇怪起伏。雲層現在正在為貿易風而聚集，他向前看，看到一群野鴨在水面上勾勒出來，然後模糊，再次勾勒出來，他知道在海上從來沒有哪個人是孤獨的。
He thought of how some men feared being out of sight of land in a small boar and knew they were right in the months of sudden bad weather. But now they were in hurricane months and, when there are no hurricanes, the weather of hurricane months is the best of all the year.
他想起有些男人在小船上害怕看不見陸地，知道在突然壞天氣的月份他們是對的。但現在是颶風季節，當沒有颶風的時候，颶風季節的天氣是一年中最好的。
If there is a hurricane you always see the signs of it in the sky for days ahead, if you are at sea. They do not see it ashore because they do not know what to look for, he thought. The land must make a difference too, in the shape of the clouds. But we have no hurricane coming now.
如果有颶風，你總是能在海上看到幾天前的徵兆。他們在岸上看不到，因為他們不知道該尋找什麼，他想。陸地也一定會影響雲的形狀。但現在我們沒有颶風來臨。
He looked at the sky and saw the white cumulus built like friendly piles of ice cream and high above were the thin feathers of the cirrus against the high September sky.
他看著天空，看到白色的積雲像友好的冰淇淋堆積在一起，高高在上的是在九月高空的細長卷雲。
“Light brisa,” he said. “Better weather for me than for you, fish.”
「輕風，」他說。「對我來說，這是比對你更好的天氣，魚。」
His left hand was still cramped, but he was unknotting it slowly.
他的左手仍然痙攣，但他正在慢慢解開它。
I hate a cramp, he thought. It is a treachery of one’s [61] own body. It is humiliating before others to have a diarrhoea from ptomaine poisoning or to vomit from it. But a cramp, he thought of it as a calambre, humiliates oneself especially when one is alone.
「我討厭痙攣，」他想。「這是自己身體的背叛。因為食物中毒而腹瀉或嘔吐，在別人面前是令人羞恥的。但痙攣，他想著，這是特別羞辱自己的，尤其是當一個人獨自一人的時候。」
If the boy were here he could rub it for me and loosen it down from the forearm, he thought. But it will loosen up.
「如果那個男孩在這裡，他可以幫我揉一下，讓我前臂的痙攣鬆開，」他想。「但它會慢慢鬆開的。」
Then, with his right hand he felt the difference in the pull of the line before he saw the slant change in the water. Then, as he leaned against the line and slapped his left hand hard and fast against his thigh he saw the line slanting slowly upward.
然後，他用右手感覺到釣線的拉力變化，才看到水面上的斜度改變。接著，當他靠在釣線上，快速而用力地拍打左手的大腿時，他看到釣線慢慢向上傾斜。
“He’s coming up,” he said. “Come on hand. Please come on.”
「牠要上來了，」他說。「來吧，手。請快點。」
The line rose slowly and steadily and then the surface of the ocean bulged ahead of the boat and the fish came out. He came out unendingly and water poured from his sides. He was bright in the sun and his head and back were dark purple and in the sun the stripes on his sides showed wide and a light lavender. His sword was as long as a baseball bat and tapered like a rapier and he rose his full length from the water and then re-entered it, smoothly, like a diver and the old [62] man saw the great scythe-blade of his tail go under and the line commenced to race out.
釣線穩穩地慢慢上升，然後海面在船的前方隆起，魚隨之而出。牠不斷地躍出水面，水流從牠的側面傾瀉而下。牠在陽光下閃閃發亮，頭部和背部是深紫色，陽光下側面的條紋顯得寬大，呈現淺紫色。牠的劍像棒球棒一樣長，逐漸變細，像一把劍，牠全身從水中竄起，然後平滑地重新潛入水中，像個跳水者，而老人則看到牠那巨大的彎刀形尾巴沉入水下，釣線開始快速向外延伸。
“He is two feet longer than the skiff,” the old man said. The line was going out fast but steadily and the fish was not panicked. The old man was trying with both hands to keep the line just inside of breaking strength. He knew that if he could not slow the fish with a steady pressure the fish could take out all the line and break it.
「牠比小船長兩尺，」老人說。釣線迅速而穩定地放出，魚卻沒有驚慌。老人雙手努力保持釣線在臨界強度之內。他知道如果不能用穩定的壓力來減緩魚的速度，魚會把所有的釣線都拉出去並且撕斷它。
He is a great fish and I must convince him, he thought. I must never let him learn his strength nor what he could do if he made his run. If I were him I would put in everything now and go until something broke. But, thank God, they are not as intelligent as we who kill them; although they are more noble and more able.
「牠是一條偉大的魚，我必須讓牠信服，」他想。「我絕不能讓牠知道自己的力量，也不能讓牠知道如果牠全力以赴會做什麼。如果我是牠，我會全力以赴，直到某樣東西斷裂。但，感謝上帝，牠們並不如我們這些殺牠們的人那麼聰明；雖然牠們更高貴且更有能力。」
The old man had seen many great fish. He had seen many that weighed more than a thousand pounds and he had caught two of that size in his life, but never alone. Now alone, and out of sight of land, he was fast to the biggest fish that he had ever seen and bigger than he had ever heard of, and his left hand was still as tight as the gripped claws of an eagle.
老人見過許多偉大的魚。他見過許多重量超過一千磅的魚，他一生中捕過兩條這樣大小的魚，但從未獨自一人。如今他獨自一人，已經看不到陸地，卻與他見過的最大的魚緊緊相連，而牠的體型比他聽說過的還要大，並且他的左手仍然緊握，像老鷹的爪子。
[63] It will uncramp though, he thought. Surely it will uncramp to help my right hand. There are three things that are brothers: the fish and my two hands. It must uncramp. It is unworthy of it to be cramped. The fish had slowed again and was going at his usual pace.
「不過它會鬆開，」他想。「一定會鬆開，以幫助我的右手。這裡有三件事是兄弟：魚和我的兩隻手。它必須鬆開。這樣緊握是不配的。魚又慢下來了，正以平常的速度游動。」
I wonder why he jumped, the old man thought. He jumped almost as though to show me how big he was. I know now, anyway, he thought. I wish I could show him what sort of man I am. But then he would see the cramped hand. Let him think I am more man than I am and I will be so. I wish I was the fish, he thought, with everything he has against only my will and my intelligence.
「我在想牠為什麼會跳，」老人想。「牠跳起來幾乎像是要告訴我牠有多大。無論如何，我現在知道了，他想。我希望我能讓牠看到我是什麼樣的人。但那樣的話，牠就會看到我的痙攣的手。讓牠以為我比實際上更像一個男人，那我就會這樣做。我希望我是那條魚，」他想，「用牠擁有的一切來對抗我唯一的意志和智慧。」
1:06:54
He settled comfortably against the wood and took his suffering as it came and the fish swam steadily and the boat moved slowly through the dark water. There was a small sea rising with the wind coming up from the east and at noon the old man’s left hand was uncramped.
他舒適地靠在木頭上，隨著痛苦的來臨而接受它，而魚則穩定地游著，小船慢慢地在黑水中前行。隨著從東方吹來的風，海面上掀起了小浪，到了中午，老人左手的痙攣也鬆開了。
“Bad news for you, fish,” he said and shifted the line over the sacks that covered his shoulders.
「對你來說是壞消息，魚，」他說，並將釣線移過覆蓋在肩上的麻袋。
He was comfortable but suffering, although he did not admit the suffering at all.
他雖然感到舒服，但仍在忍受痛苦，儘管他根本不承認自己在受苦。
“I am not religious,” he said. “But I will say ten Our [64] Fathers and ten Hail Marys that I should catch this fish, and I promise to make a pilgrimage to the Virgin of Cobre if I catch him. That is a promise.”
「我不信宗教，」他說。「但我會念十遍《我們的父親》和十遍《萬福瑪利亞》，希望能夠捕到這條魚，並且如果捕到牠，我承諾會朝聖去朝聖聖母，這是我的承諾。」
He commenced to say his prayers mechanically. Sometimes he would be so tired that he could not remember the prayer and then he would say them fast so that they would come automatically. Hail Marys are easier to say than Our Fathers, he thought.
他開始機械性地念起祈禱。有時他會疲憊到連祈禱詞都記不住，於是他會快速地念，讓它們自動流出來。他覺得《萬福瑪利亞》比《我們的父親》好念。
“Hail Mary full of Grace the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death. Amen.” Then he added, “Blessed Virgin, pray for the death of this fish. Wonderful though he is.”
「萬福瑪利亞，充滿恩典，主與你同在。你在女人中是被祝福的，並且你所懷的聖母耶穌的果實也是被祝福的。聖母瑪利亞，天主之母，現在和我們臨終的時候為我們罪人祈禱。阿們。」然後他加上，「聖母，為這條魚的死祈禱。雖然牠是那麼的精彩。」
With his prayers said, and feeling much better, but suffering exactly as much, and perhaps a little more, he leaned against the wood of the bow and began, mechanically, to work the fingers of his left hand.
念完祈禱後，他感覺好多了，但痛苦的程度沒有減輕，甚至可能有些增加。他靠在船頭的木頭上，開始機械地活動左手的手指。
The sun was hot now although the breeze was rising gently.
現在太陽正當高，儘管微風輕輕地升起。
“I had better re-bait that little line out over the stern,” he said. “If the fish decides to stay another night I will need to eat again and the water is low in the bottle. I don’t think I can get anything but a dolphin [65] here. But if I eat him fresh enough he won’t be bad. I wish a flying fish would come on board tonight. But I have no light to attract them. A flying fish is excellent to eat raw and I would not have to cut him up. I must save all my strength now. Christ, I did not know he was so big.”
「我最好把那條小線重新餌釣到船尾，」他說。「如果魚決定再呆一晚，我需要再吃點東西，而瓶子裡的水也快沒了。我想我這裡得到的只有海豚。可是如果我能吃到新鮮的牠，倒也不錯。我希望今晚能有飛魚上船。但我沒有光來吸引牠們。飛魚生吃非常美味，我就不必切開牠。我現在必須保存所有的力氣。基督啊，我不知道牠會這麼大。」
“I’ll kill him though,” he said. “In all his greatness and his glory.”
「不過我會殺了牠，」他說。「在牠的偉大和榮耀中。」
Although it is unjust, he thought. But I will show him what a man can do and what a man endures.
雖然這樣是不公正的，他想。「但我要讓牠看到一個人能做什麼，能忍受什麼。」
“I told the boy I was a strange old man,” he said.
「我告訴那個男孩我是個奇怪的老頭，」他說。
“Now is when I must prove it.”
「現在是我證明的時候了。」
The thousand times that he had proved it meant nothing. Now he was proving it again. Each time was a new time and he never thought about the past when he was doing it.
他曾經千百次證明的事對他來說毫無意義。現在他又在證明。每一次都是新的，他在做這些事情的時候從未考慮過過去。
I wish he’d sleep and I could sleep and dream about the lions, he thought. Why are the lions the main thing that is left? Don’t think, old man, he said to himself, Rest gently now against the wood and think of nothing. He is working. Work as little as you can.
他希望魚能睡著，而他也能入睡，夢見獅子，他想。為什麼獅子是唯一剩下的主要事物？「別想了，老頭子，」他對自己說，「現在就輕輕靠著木頭，什麼都不想。牠在工作。儘量少工作。」
It was getting into the afternoon and the boat still moved slowly and steadily. But there was an added drag now from the easterly breeze and the old man [66] rode gently with the small sea and the hurt of the cord across his back came to him easily and smoothly.
下午漸漸過去，小船仍然慢慢而穩定地行駛著。但此時東風吹來，增加了阻力，老人輕輕地隨著小浪漂動，背上繩索的疼痛也變得更加容易承受。
Once in the afternoon the line started to rise again. But the fish only continued to swim at a slightly higher level. The sun was on the old man’s left arm and shoulder and on his back. So he knew the fish had turned east of north.
下午的某個時候，釣線又開始上升了。但魚只是繼續在稍高的水位游著。太陽照在老人的左臂、肩膀和背上，這讓他知道魚已經轉向東北方。
Now that he had seen him once, he could picture the fish swimming in the water with his purple pectoral fins set wide as wings and the great erect tail slicing through the dark. I wonder how much he sees at that depth, the old man thought. His eye is huge and a horse, with much less eye, can see in the dark. Once I could see quite well in the dark. Not in the absolute dark. But almost as a cat sees.
既然他已經見過魚一次，他就能想像魚在水中游著，紫色的胸鰭像翅膀一樣展開，巨大的直立尾巴在黑暗中切過。他想知道在那樣的深度，魚能看見多少東西。牠的眼睛很大，而一匹馬的眼睛則小得多，但也能在黑暗中看見。以前我也能在黑暗中看得很清楚。不是在完全黑暗中，但幾乎能像貓一樣看見。
The sun and his steady movement of his fingers had uncramped his left hand now completely and he began to shift more of the strain to it and he shrugged the muscles of his back to shift the hurt of the cord a little.
陽光和他手指的穩定運動已經完全讓他的左手不再痙攣，他開始將更多的壓力轉移到左手上，並耸了耸背部的肌肉，稍微調整了一下繩索的疼痛。
“If you’re not tired, fish,” he said aloud, “you must be very strange.”
「如果你不累的話，魚，」他大聲說，「那你一定很奇怪。」
He felt very tired now and he knew the night would come soon and he tried to think of other things. He thought of the Big Leagues, to him they were the Gran [67] Ligas, and he knew that the Yankees of New York were playing the Tigres of Detroit.
他現在感到非常疲憊，知道夜晚即將來臨，於是努力想著其他的事情。他想到了大聯盟，對他來說就是「Gran Ligas」，他知道紐約的洋基隊正在與底特律的老虎隊比賽。
This is the second day now that I do not know the result of the juegos, he thought. But I must have confidence and I must be worthy of the great DiMaggio who does all things perfectly even with the pain of the bone spur in his heel. What is a bone spur? he asked himself. Un espuela de hueso. We do not have them. Can it be as painful as the spur of a fighting cock in one’s heel? I do not think I could endure that or the loss of the eye and of both eyes and continue to fight as the fighting cocks do. Man is not much beside the great birds and beasts. Still I would rather be that beast down there in the darkness of the sea.
「這是我第二天不知道比賽結果了，」他想。「但我必須有信心，並且要配得上那位即便在跟骨刺的疼痛作鬥爭時也能完美地做到一切的偉大迪馬吉奧。什麼是骨刺？」他問自己。「Un espuela de hueso。我們沒有骨刺。它的痛苦會像鬥雞腳上的刺一樣嗎？我想我無法忍受那種痛苦，也無法忍受失去一隻眼睛甚至兩隻眼睛後繼續像鬥雞一樣戰鬥。人類與那些偉大的鳥獸相比並不算什麼。不過，我仍然寧願成為那個在黑暗海洋中掙扎的野獸。」
“Unless sharks come,” he said aloud. “If sharks come, God pity him and me.”
「除非來了鯊魚，」他大聲說。「如果鯊魚來了，天啊，可憐牠和我。」
Do you believe the great DiMaggio would stay with a fish as long as I will stay with this one? he thought. I am sure he would and more since he is young and strong. Also his father was a fisherman. But would the bone spur hurt him too much?
你相信偉大的迪馬吉奧會像我一樣長時間與魚搏鬥嗎？他想。我確定他會，而且還會更久，因為他年輕又強壯。此外，他的父親是一名漁夫。但骨刺會不會讓他也受不了？
“I do not know,” he said aloud. “I never had a bone spur.”
「我不知道，」他大聲說。「我從來沒有過骨刺。」
1:12:38
As the sun set he remembered, to give himself more [68] confidence, the time in the tavern at Casablanca when he had played the hand game with the great negro from Cienfuegos who was the strongest man on the docks. They had gone one day and one night with their elbows on a chalk line on the table and their forearms straight up and their hands gripped tight. Each one was trying to force the other’s hand down onto the table. There was much betting and people went in and out of the room under the kerosene lights and he had looked at the arm and hand of the negro and at the negro’s face. They changed the referees every four hours after the first eight so that the referees could sleep. Blood came out from under the fingernails of both his and the negro’s hands and they looked each other in the eye and at their hands and forearms and the bettors went in and out of the room and sat on high chairs against the wall and watched. The walls were painted bright blue and were of wood and the lamps threw their shadows against them. The negro’s shadow was huge and it moved on the wall as the breeze moved the lamps.
當太陽下山時，他想起了為了給自己增添信心，在卡薩布蘭卡酒館裡與來自錫恩富戈斯的偉大黑人一起玩手腕摔角的那段時光。那是一整天和一整夜，他們的肘部放在桌上的白粉筆線上，前臂直立，雙手緊緊相握。每個人都在努力將對方的手壓到桌子上。賭注很多，人們在煤油燈下進進出出，他看著黑人那結實的手臂和手，還有黑人的臉。他們在前八小時後每四個小時就換一次裁判，以便讓裁判休息。血從他和黑人的指甲下流出，他們互相對視，凝視著對方的手和前臂，而賭徒們在房間裡進進出出，坐在牆邊的高凳上觀看。牆壁是鮮豔的藍色，木製的，燈光在牆上投下了影子。黑人的影子巨大，隨著微風吹動燈光在牆上移動。
The odds would change back and forth all night and they fed the negro rum and lighted cigarettes for him.
整個晚上賠率變來變去，他們給黑人灌了蘭姆酒，還點燃香煙給他。
Then the negro, after the rum, would try for a tremendous [69] effort and once he had the old man, who was not an old man then but was Santiago El Campeon, nearly three inches off balance. But the old man had raised his hand up to dead even again. He was sure then that he had the negro, who was a fine man and a great athlete, beaten. And at daylight when the bettors were asking that it be called a draw and the referee was shaking his head, he had unleashed his effort and forced the hand of the negro down and down until it rested on the wood. The match had started on a Sunday morning and ended on a Monday morning. Many of the bettors had asked for a draw because they had to go to work on the docks loading sacks of sugar or at the Havana Coal Company. Otherwise everyone would have wanted it to go to a finish. But he had finished it anyway and before anyone had to go to work.
然後黑人在喝了蘭姆酒後，會嘗試做出一個巨大的努力，曾經一度把老人幾乎弄得失去平衡，當時的老人並不是現在的老翁，而是聖地亞哥·艾爾·坎佩翁（Santiago El Campeon），差不多有三英寸的傾斜。但老人又把手抬回了平衡。當時他確信自己已經擊敗了這位出色的運動員和優秀的人。而在黎明時分，當賭徒們要求裁判宣佈平局，而裁判搖著頭時，他發揮了全力，將黑人的手一點一滴地壓下去，直到它靠在了木桌上。比賽是星期天早上開始，星期一早上結束的。許多賭徒要求平局，因為他們必須去碼頭裝載糖袋，或者去哈瓦那煤礦公司工作。否則每個人都會希望比賽能進行到最後。但他還是完成了比賽，並在沒有人必須去工作之前結束了。
For a long time after that everyone had called him The Champion and there had been a return match in the spring. But not much money was bet and he had won it quite easily since he had broken the confidence of the negro from Cienfuegos in the first match. After that he had a few matches and then no more. He decided that he could beat anyone if he wanted to badly enough and he decided that it was bad for his right [70] hand for fishing. He had tried a few practice matches with his left hand. But his left hand had always been a traitor and would not do what he called on it to do and he did not trust it.
在那之後的很長一段時間，大家都叫他「冠軍」，並且在春天舉行了一場復賽。但是並沒有賭很多錢，他輕鬆贏得了比賽，因為他在首場比賽中打擊了來自錫恩富戈斯的黑人的信心。之後他進行了幾場比賽，但不再有更多。他決定如果他非常想贏，他就可以擊敗任何人，並且他認為這樣對他的右手釣魚不好。他嘗試用左手進行幾場練習賽，但他的左手總是背叛他，無法執行他要求的動作，因此他不信任它。
The sun will bake it out well now, he thought. It should not cramp on me again unless it gets too cold in the night. I wonder what this night will bring.
「現在太陽會把它曬得很好，」他想。「除非晚上太冷，不然它不應該再痙攣。我想知道今晚會帶來什麼。」
An airplane passed overhead on its course to Miami and he watched its shadow scaring up the schools of flying fish.
一架飛機從頭頂飛過，朝著邁阿密的方向，他看著飛機的影子驚動了飛魚群。
“With so much flying fish there should be dolphin,” he said, and leaned back on the line to see if it was possible to gain any on his fish. But he could not and it stayed at the hardness and water-drop shivering that preceded breaking. The boat moved ahead slowly and he watched the airplane until he could no longer see it.
「有這麼多的飛魚，應該會有海豚，」他說，然後向後靠在釣線上，想看看是否有可能拉近與魚的距離。但他無法做到，釣線保持在即將斷裂的堅硬和水滴顫抖的狀態。小船慢慢向前移動，他一直看著飛機，直到再也看不見它為止。
It must be very strange in an airplane, he thought. I wonder what the sea looks like from that height? They should be able to see the fish well if they do not fly too high. I would like to fly very slowly at two hundred fathoms high and see the fish from above. In the turtle boats I was in the cross-trees of the mast-head and even at that height I saw much. The dolphin look greener from there and you can see their stripes and their purple [71] spots and you can see all of the school as they swim. Why is it that all the fast-moving fish of the dark current have purple backs and usually purple stripes or spots? The dolphin looks green of course because he is really golden. But when he comes to feed, truly hungry, purple stripes show on his sides as on a marlin. Can it be anger, or the greater speed he makes that brings them out?
他想，飛機裡一定非常奇怪。我想知道從那麼高的地方，海洋看起來是什麼樣子？如果不飛得太高，他們應該能清楚看到魚。我想以兩百尋的高度緩慢飛行，從上方觀察魚。在海龜船上，我曾經站在桅頂的橫樑上，即使在那個高度，我也看到了很多。從那裡看，海豚看起來更綠，還能看到它們的條紋和紫色斑點，並且能看到整個魚群游動的樣子。為什麼所有在黑暗水流中快速游動的魚都擁有紫色的背部，通常還有紫色的條紋或斑點？海豚看起來綠，當然是因為它實際上是金色的。但當它來進食時，真的很餓，側面會顯示出紫色的條紋，就像劍魚一樣。那是憤怒，還是它更快的速度使這些條紋顯現出來？
Just before it was dark, as they passed a great island of Sargasso weed that heaved and swung in the light sea as though the ocean were making love with something under a yellow blanket, his small line was taken by a dolphin. He saw it first when it jumped in the air, true gold in the last of the sun and bending and flapping wildly in the air. It jumped again and again in the acrobatics of its fear and he worked his way back to the stern and crouching and holding the big line with his right hand and arm, he pulled the dolphin in with his left hand, stepping on the gained line each time with his bare left foot. When the fish was at the stem, plunging and cutting from side to side in desperation, the old man leaned over the stern and lifted the burnished gold fish with its purple spots over the stem. Its jaws were working convulsively in quick bites against [72] the hook and it pounded the bottom of the skiff with its long flat body, its tail and its head until he clubbed it across the shining golden head until it shivered and was still.
就在天黑之前，當他們經過一個巨大的海藻島時，海藻在微波中起伏，彷彿海洋正在與某些東西在黃色的毯子下嬉戲，他的小釣線被一條海豚咬住了。他第一次看到它是在空中跳起來的時候，真正的金色在最後的陽光下彎曲著，狂野地拍打著空氣。它又跳了幾次，因為恐懼而做出雜技般的動作，他回到船尾，蹲下來用右手和手臂握住大釣線，然後用左手拉近海豚，每次都用赤腳踩在增長的釣線上。當魚在船頭翻騰，絕望地來回搖擺時，老人向船尾傾身，將那條燦爛金色的魚，帶著紫色斑點，舉過船頭。它的嘴急促地咬著鉤子，並用它那長而扁平的身體、尾巴和頭撞擊著小船的底部，直到老人用棍子狠狠打在它閃亮的金色頭上，直到它顫抖著靜止下來。
The old man unhooked the fish, re-baited the line with another sardine and tossed it over. Then he worked his way slowly back to the bow. He washed his left hand and wiped it on his trousers. Then he shifted the heavy line from his right hand to his left and washed his right hand in the sea while he watched the sun go into the ocean and the slant of the big cord.
老人卸下魚鉤，重新用另一條沙丁魚裝餌，然後將它扔進水中。接著他慢慢走回船頭，洗了洗左手，並用褲子擦乾。然後他把沉重的釣線從右手移到左手，在海裡洗了右手，同時看著太陽沉入海洋，並注意到大釣線的角度。
“He hasn’t changed at all,” he said. But watching the movement of the water against his hand he noted that it was perceptibly slower.
「它一點都沒變，」他說。但看著水流在他手上的動作，他注意到水的流動變得明顯慢了。
“I’ll lash the two oars together across the stern and that will slow him in the night,” he said. “He’s good for the night and so am I.”
「我會把兩根槳綁在船尾，這樣可以在夜裡減慢速度，」他說。「它適合過夜，我也是。」
It would be better to gut the dolphin a little later to save the blood in the meat, he thought. I can do that a little later and lash the oars to make a drag at the same time. I had better keep the fish quiet now and not disturb him too much at sunset. The setting of the sun is a difficult time for all fish. He let his hand dry in the air then grasped the line [73] with it and eased himself as much as he could and allowed himself to be pulled forward against the wood so that the boat took the strain as much, or more, than he did.
他想，稍後再剖海豚會更好，這樣可以保存肉中的血液。我可以稍後再做，並同時綁住槳製造阻力。我最好現在讓魚安靜，不要在日落時打擾它。日落時是所有魚的困難時期。他讓手在空氣中晾乾，然後握住釣線，盡量讓自己放鬆，並讓自己向前被拉向木頭，這樣船就能承受更多的壓力，甚至比他自己還多。
I’m learning how to do it, he thought. This part of it anyway. Then too, remember he hasn’t eaten since he took the bait and he is huge and needs much food. I have eaten the whole bonito. Tomorrow I will eat the dolphin. He called it dorado. Perhaps I should eat some of it when I clean it. It will be harder to eat than the bonito. But, then, nothing is easy.
「我正在學習如何做到這一點，」他想。無論如何，這部分是如此。再者，記住自從他咬住餌後就沒有吃過東西，而他又那麼巨大，需要很多食物。我已經吃了整條金槍魚。明天我會吃海豚。他叫它「多拉多」（dorado）。也許我在清理它時應該吃一些。這會比金槍魚更難吃。但，話說回來，沒有什麼是簡單的。
“How do you feel, fish?” he asked aloud. “I feel good and my left hand is better and I have food for a night and a day. Pull the boat, fish.”
「你覺得怎麼樣，魚？」他大聲問。「我覺得很好，我的左手好多了，我有足夠的食物度過一夜和一天。拉動小船吧，魚。」
He did not truly feel good because the pain from the cord across his back had almost passed pain and gone into a dullness that he mistrusted. But I have had worse things than that, he thought. My hand is only cut a little and the cramp is gone from the other. My legs are all right. Also now I have gained on him in the question of sustenance.
他並不真的感覺很好，因為背上的繩索帶來的疼痛幾乎已經超過了痛感，變得鈍麻，讓他不信任。但我經歷過比這更糟的事情，他想。我的手只是稍微割傷，另一隻手的痙攣也消失了。我的腿也還好。此外，現在在食物供應上我也在逐漸佔據上風。
1:20:26
It was dark now as it becomes dark quickly after the sun sets in September. He lay against the worn wood of the bow and rested all that he could. The first stars [74] were out. He did not know the name of Rigel but he saw it and knew soon they would all be out and he would have all his distant friends.
現在天已經黑了，九月的時候，夕陽落下後黑暗來得很快。他靠在磨損的船頭木頭上，盡量休息。他看到第一顆星星出現了。他不知道「參宿」的名字，但他看到了它，知道很快所有的星星都會出現，他將擁有所有遙遠的朋友。
“The fish is my friend too,” he said aloud. “I have never seen or heard of such a fish. But I must kill him. I am glad we do not have to try to kill the stars.”
「這條魚也是我的朋友，」他大聲說。「我從未見過或聽說過這樣的魚。但我必須殺了它。我很高興我們不必嘗試去殺死星星。」
Imagine if each day a man must try to kill the moon, he thought. The moon runs away. But imagine if a man each day should have to try to kill the sun? We were born lucky, he thought.
想像一下，如果每天都要有一個人試著去殺死月亮，他想。月亮會逃跑。但想像一下，如果每天都要有一個人試著去殺死太陽呢？我們生來就幸運，他想。
Then he was sorry for the great fish that had nothing to eat and his determination to kill him never relaxed in his sorrow for him. How many people will he feed, he thought. But are they worthy to eat him? No, of course not. There is no one worthy of eating him from the manner of his behaviour and his great dignity.
然後他為這條沒有東西可吃的巨大魚感到遺憾，然而他要殺死它的決心在對它的憐憫中從未放鬆。他想，這條魚能養活多少人。但他們值得吃它嗎？不，當然不。他的舉止和偉大的尊嚴，使得沒有任何人值得吃掉他。
I do not understand these things, he thought. But it is good that we do not have to try to kill the sun or the moon or the stars. It is enough to live on the sea and kill our true brothers.
「我不理解這些事情，」他想。「但我們不必試著去殺死太陽或月亮或星星，這是件好事。能在海上生活，並殺死我們真正的兄弟，這已經足夠了。」
Now, he thought, I must think about the drag. It has its perils and its merits. I may lose so much line that I will lose him, if he makes his effort and the drag [75] made by the oars is in place and the boat loses all her lightness. Her lightness prolongs both our suffering but it is my safety since he has great speed that he has never yet employed. No matter what passes I must gut the dolphin so he does not spoil and eat some of him to be strong.
現在，他想，我必須考慮一下拖曳。它有其危險和優點。如果他努力掙扎，我可能會失去太多的釣線，讓他逃掉，如果槳的拖曳到位，船就會失去所有的輕便。這種輕便延長了我們兩者的痛苦，但這也是我的安全，因為他擁有從未發揮過的巨大速度。不管發生什麼事，我都必須剖開海豚，這樣它才不會壞掉，並且吃一些來增強力量。
Now I will rest an hour more and feel that he is solid and steady before I move back to the stern to do the work and make the decision. In the meantime I can see how he acts and if he shows any changes. The oars are a good trick; but it has reached the time to play for safety. He is much fish still and I saw that the hook was in the corner of his mouth and he has kept his mouth tight shut. The punishment of the hook is nothing. The punishment of hunger, and that he is against something that he does not comprehend, is everything. Rest now, old man, and let him work until your next duty comes.
「現在我再休息一小時，感覺到他是堅實穩定的，然後我再回到船尾做工作並做出決定。與此同時，我可以觀察他的行動，看看他是否有任何變化。槳是一個好把戲；但現在是時候為安全而奮鬥了。他仍然是魚，我看到鉤子在他的嘴角，他一直緊緊閉著嘴。鉤子的懲罰算不了什麼。饑餓的懲罰，以及他對著一個他無法理解的東西的掙扎，才是全部。現在休息吧，老頭，讓他工作，直到你的下一個任務來臨。」
He rested for what he believed to be two hours. The moon did not rise now until late and he had no way of judging the time. Nor was he really resting except comparatively. He was still bearing the pull of the fish across his shoulders but he placed his left hand on the [76] gunwale of the bow and confided more and more of the resistance to the fish to the skiff itself.
他休息了他認為的兩個小時。月亮現在晚才升起，他無法判斷時間。他也真的並沒有休息，只是相對而言。他仍然感受到魚的拉力壓在肩膀上，但他將左手放在船頭的槳欄上，將越來越多的抵抗交給小船本身。
How simple it would be if I could make the line fast, he thought. But with one small lurch he could break it. I must cushion the pull of the line with my body and at all times be ready to give line with both hands.
「如果我能把釣線固定住，那將會是多麼簡單啊，」他想。但只要稍微一個顛簸，它就會斷。我必須用我的身體緩衝釣線的拉力，並時刻準備用雙手放線。
“But you have not slept yet, old man,” he said aloud. “It is half a day and a night and now another day and you have not slept. You must devise a way so that you sleep a little if he is quiet and steady. If you do not sleep you might become unclear in the head.”
「但你還沒有睡呢，老頭，」他大聲說。「已經過了半天一夜，現在又是一個白天，你還沒有睡。你必須想辦法在他安靜穩定的時候小睡一下。如果你不睡，你的頭可能會變得模糊不清。」
I’m clear enough in the head, he thought. Too clear. I am as clear as the stars that are my brothers. Still I must sleep. They sleep and the moon and the sun sleep and even the ocean sleeps sometimes on certain days when there is no current and a flat calm.
我在頭腦中很清醒，他想。太清醒了。我就像那些星星一樣清晰，它們是我的兄弟。儘管如此，我還是必須睡覺。它們在睡覺，月亮和太陽也在睡覺，甚至在某些沒有洋流且平靜的日子裡，海洋也會睡覺。
But remember to sleep, he thought. Make yourself do it and devise some simple and sure way about the lines. Now go back and prepare the dolphin. It is too dangerous to rig the oars as a drag if you must sleep.
但記得要睡覺，他想。強迫自己去做，並想出一些簡單而可靠的方式來處理釣線。現在回去準備海豚。如果必須睡覺，那麼把槳設置成拖曳裝置太危險了。
I could go without sleeping, he told himself. But it would be too dangerous.
我可以不睡覺，他告訴自己。但這樣太危險了。
[77] He started to work his way back to the stern on his hands and knees, being careful not to jerk against the fish. He may be half asleep himself, he thought. But I do not want him to rest. He must pull until he dies.
他開始用手和膝蓋爬回船尾，小心不要對魚施加過大的拉力。他想，他可能自己也半夢半醒。但我不想讓他休息。他必須拉到死為止。
Back in the stern he turned so that his left hand held the strain of the line across his shoulders and drew his knife from its sheath with his right hand. The stars were bright now and he saw the dolphin clearly and he pushed the blade of his knife into his head and drew him out from under the stern. He put one of his feet on the fish and slit him quickly from the vent up to the tip of his lower jaw. Then he put his knife down and gutted him with his right hand, scooping him clean and pulling the gills clear.
回到船尾，他轉過身，用左手支撐著肩上的釣線，右手抽出刀子。現在星星很亮，他清楚地看到了海豚，他用刀刃刺入魚的頭部，將魚從船尾下拉出來。他將一隻腳放在魚上，迅速從魚肛部切開，一直切到下頜的尖端。然後他放下刀，用右手內臟，將內臟清理乾淨並拉出魚鰓。
He felt the maw heavy and slippery in his hands and he slit it open. There were two flying fish inside. They were fresh and hard and he laid them side by side and dropped the guts and the gills over the stern. They sank leaving a trail of phosphorescence in the water. The dolphin was cold and a leprous gray-white now in the starlight and the old man skinned one side of him while he held his right foot on the fish’s head. Then he turned him over and skinned the other side and cut each side off from the head down to the tail.
他感覺到內臟在手中沉重而滑膩，於是將其切開。裡面有兩條飛魚。它們新鮮且堅硬，他將它們並排放置，然後將內臟和魚鰓扔過船尾。它們下沉，留下一條磷光的痕跡在水中。海豚在星光下變得冰冷，呈現出麻風病般的灰白色，老人一邊用右腳壓住魚的頭，一邊剝去一側的魚皮。然後他翻過來，剝去另一側，從魚頭一直切到魚尾。
[78] He slid the carcass overboard and looked to see if there was any swirl in the water. But there was only the light of its slow descent. He turned then and placed the two flying fish inside the two fillets of fish and putting his knife back in its sheath, he worked his way slowly back to the bow. His back was bent with the weight of the line across it and he carried the fish in his right hand.
他將魚骨架滑入水中，查看水面是否有漩渦。但只看到它緩慢下沉的光芒。他轉過身，將兩條飛魚放入兩片魚肉中，將刀子放回刀鞘，慢慢爬回船頭。由於釣線的重量，他的背部彎曲，右手提著魚。
Back in the bow he laid the two fillets of fish out on the wood with the flying fish beside them. After that he settled the line across his shoulders in a new place and held it again with his left hand resting on the gunwale. Then he leaned over the side and washed the flying fish in the water, noting the speed of the water against his hand. His hand was phosphorescent from skinning the fish and he watched the flow of the water against it. The flow was less strong and as he rubbed the side of his hand against the planking of the skiff, particles of phosphorus floated off and drifted slowly astern.
回到船頭，他將兩片魚肉和飛魚放在木板上。之後，他將釣線在肩膀上重新放置，並用左手再次握住它，將其放在槳欄上。然後他傾身向側面，在水中沖洗飛魚，注意水流在手上的速度。他的手因為剝魚而發出磷光，他注視著水流對抗它。水流不再強勁，當他將手的側面擦在小船的木板上時，磷的顆粒飄散開來，慢慢漂向船尾。
“He is tiring or he is resting,” the old man said. “Now let me get through the eating of this dolphin and get some rest and a little sleep.”
「他在疲倦或休息，」老人說。「現在讓我處理這條海豚，然後稍微休息一下，睡一會兒。」
Under the stars and with the night colder all the [79] time he ate half of one of the dolphin fillets and one of the flying fish, gutted and with its head cut off.
在星空下，夜色變得愈來愈冷，他吃掉了半片海豚的魚片和一條去掉內臟和頭的飛魚。
1:27:08
“What an excellent fish dolphin is to eat cooked,” he said. “And what a miserable fish raw. I will never go in a boat again without salt or limes.”
「海豚煮熟後真是一條極好的魚，」他說。「而生吃卻是一條可憐的魚。我再也不會在沒有鹽或青檸的情況下上船了。」
If I had brains I would have splashed water on the bow all day and drying, it would have made salt, he thought. But then I did not hook the dolphin until almost sunset. Still it was a lack of preparation. But I have chewed it all well and I am not nauseated.
「如果我有腦子，我早該整天在船頭潑水，讓它乾了，就能製作出鹽，」他想。但我直到快日落才勾住海豚。這仍然是一種準備不足。但我已經把它咀嚼得很好，並且沒有噁心。
The sky was clouding over to the east and one after another the stars he knew were gone. It looked now as though he were moving into a great canyon of clouds and the wind had dropped.
天空在東邊開始陰雲密布，他熟悉的一顆顆星星陸續消失。看起來現在就像他進入了一個巨大的雲峽谷，風也停了下來。
“There will be bad weather in three or four days,” he said. “But not tonight and not tomorrow. Rig now to get some sleep, old man, while the fish is calm and steady.”
「三四天後會有壞天氣，」他說。「但今晚不會，明天也不會。老頭子，現在裝備好，趁魚平靜穩定時去睡一覺。」
He held the line tight in his right hand and then pushed his thigh against his right hand as he leaned all his weight against the wood of the bow. Then he passed the line a little lower on his shoulders and braced his left hand on it.
他用右手緊握釣線，然後將大腿抵在右手上，將整個重量壓在船頭的木頭上。接著他把釣線稍微放低在肩膀上，並用左手支撐住。
My right hand can hold it as long as it is braced, he [80] thought If it relaxes in sleep my left hand will wake me as the line goes out. It is hard on the right hand. But he is used to punishment Even if I sleep twenty minutes or a half an hour it is good. He lay forward cramping himself against the line with all of his body, putting all his weight onto his right band, and he was asleep.
「只要支撐住，我的右手就能握住它，」他想。「如果在睡眠中放鬆，左手會在釣線放出時叫醒我。這對右手來說很困難，但他已經習慣了懲罰。即使我睡二十分鐘或半小時也好。」他向前躺下，全身緊貼著釣線，將所有的重量壓在右手上，然後便進入了夢鄉。
He did not dream of the lions but instead of a vast school of porpoises that stretched for eight or ten miles and it was in the time of their mating and they would leap high into the air and return into the same hole they had made in the water when they leaped.
他沒有夢見獅子，而是夢見了一大群海豚，延展八到十英里，正值交配季節，它們會高高跳起，然後再次回到它們在水中所造成的那個洞裡。
Then he dreamed that he was in the village on his bed and there was a norther and he was very cold and his right arm was asleep because his head had rested on it instead of a pillow.
然後他夢見自己躺在村莊的床上，北風呼嘯，讓他感到寒冷，因為他的頭枕在右臂上，而不是枕頭上。
After that he began to dream of the long yellow beach and he saw the first of the lions come down onto it in the early dark and then the other lions came and he rested his chin on the wood of the bows where the ship lay anchored with the evening off-shore breeze and he waited to see if there would be more lions and he was happy.
之後，他開始夢見長長的黃色沙灘，看到第一隻獅子在黎明時分走上沙灘，然後其他獅子也來了。他將下巴靠在船頭的木板上，船停泊在晚上吹來的海風中，等待看看是否會有更多獅子，他感到高興。
The moon had been up for a long time but he slept [81] on and the fish pulled on steadily and the boat moved into the tunnel of clouds.
月亮已經升起很久，但他依然在睡覺，魚穩穩地拉著釣線，小船則進入雲隧道。
He woke with the jerk of his right fist coming up against his face and the line burning out through his right hand. He had no feeling of his left hand but he braked all he could with his right and the line rushed out. Finally his left hand found the line and he leaned back against the line and now it burned his back and his left hand, and his left hand was taking all the strain and cutting badly. He looked back at the coils of line and they were feeding smoothly. Just then the fish jumped making a great bursting of the ocean and then a heavy fall. Then he jumped again and again and the boat was going fast although line was still racing out and the old man was raising the strain to breaking point and raising it to breaking point again and again. He had been pulled down tight onto the bow and his face was in the cut slice of dolphin and he could not move.
他被右拳猛地撞上臉的感覺驚醒，釣線從他的右手中滑出，燒灼著他。他的左手沒有感覺，但他盡量用右手制止，釣線卻迅速放出。最終，他的左手找到釣線，他向後傾身，釣線現在燒灼著他的背部和左手，左手承受著所有的壓力，並且感到劇痛。他回頭看看釣線的圈子，發現它們平穩地放出。就在此時，魚跳了起來，帶來一陣巨大的海浪爆發，隨後又重重落下。然後它再次跳起，然後又跳了一次，雖然釣線仍在急速放出，但小船卻在迅速前進，老人不斷地將拉力提高到極限，然後又一次次地提高到極限。他緊緊地被拉到船頭，臉埋在切好的海豚肉中，動不了。
This is what we waited for, he thought. So now let us take it. Make him pay for the line, he thought. Make him pay for it.
「這就是我們所等待的，」他想。「那麼，現在讓我們抓住它。讓他為釣線付出代價，」他想。「讓他為此付出代價。」
He could not see the fish’s jumps but only heard the [82] breaking of the ocean and the heavy splash as he fell. The speed of the line was cutting his hands badly but he had always known this would happen and he tried to keep the cutting across the calloused parts and not let the line slip into the palm nor cut the fingers.
他看不見魚的跳躍，只聽到海浪的破裂聲和魚重重落下的濺水聲。釣線的速度狠狠地割著他的手，但他一直知道會發生這種情況，他試著將割傷保持在老繭的部位，不讓釣線滑進手掌或割到手指。
If the boy was here he would wet the coils of line, he thought. Yes. If the boy were here. If the boy were here.
「如果那個男孩在這裡，他會潑水在釣線上，」他想。「是的。如果那個男孩在這裡。如果那個男孩在這裡。」
The line went out and out and out but it was slowing now and he was making the fish earn each inch of it. Now he got his head up from the wood and out of the slice of fish that his cheek had crushed. Then he was on his knees and then he rose slowly to his feet. He was ceding line but more slowly all he time. He worked back to where he could feel with his foot the coils of line that he could not see. There was plenty of line still and now the fish had to pull the friction of all that new line through the water.
釣線一圈又一圈地放出，但現在速度減慢了，他讓魚為每一寸釣線付出代價。現在他抬起頭，從被他臉頰壓碎的魚肉中抽出來。然後他跪了下來，慢慢站了起來。他在放出釣線，但速度變得更慢了。他向後移動，直到能用腳感受到看不見的釣線圈。仍然有足夠的釣線，現在魚必須拉過水中的所有新釣線所產生的摩擦。
Yes, he thought. And now he has jumped more than a dozen times and filled the sacks along his back with air and he cannot go down deep to die where I cannot bring him up. He will start circling soon and then I must work on him. I wonder what started him so suddenly? Could it have been hunger that made him desperate, [83] or was he frightened by something in the night? Maybe he suddenly felt fear. But he was such a calm, strong fish and he seemed so fearless and so confident. It is strange.
「是的，」他想。「現在它已經跳了十多次，背上的囊袋充滿了空氣，它無法下潛到深處去死，而我無法把它拉上來。它很快就會開始打轉，然後我必須對付它。我在想，究竟是什麼讓它如此突然地開始反抗？是飢餓讓它變得絕望，還是被夜裡的某些東西嚇到了？也許它突然感受到恐懼。但它是如此冷靜、強壯的魚，似乎如此無畏和自信。真奇怪。」
“You better be fearless and confident yourself, old man,” he said. “You’re holding him again but you cannot get line. But soon he has to circle.”
「你最好自己也無畏和自信，老頭，」他說。「你再次控制住它，但你無法獲得釣線。但它很快就必須打轉了。」
The old man held him with his left hand and his shoulders now and stooped down and scooped up water in his right hand to get the crushed dolphin flesh off of his face. He was afraid that it might nauseate him and he would vomit and lose his strength. When his face was cleaned he washed his right hand in the water over the side and then let it stay in the salt water while he watched the first light come before the sunrise. He’s headed almost east, he thought. That means he is tired and going with the current. Soon he will have to circle. Then our true work begins.
老人用左手和肩膀穩住釣線，彎下身子用右手撥水，將壓碎的海豚肉沖掉。他擔心這會讓他感到噁心，並嘔吐失去力量。清理完臉後，他把右手在水中洗了洗，然後把它浸泡在鹹水裡，目不轉睛地看著第一縷曙光在日出前出現。「它幾乎是朝東走，」他想。「這意味著它疲憊不堪，正在隨著洋流前進。很快它就必須打轉了。然後我們真正的工作就開始了。」
After he judged that his right hand had been in the water long enough he took it out and looked at it.
在他判斷右手在水裡待的時間夠久後，他把手拿出來，檢查了一下。
“It is not bad,” he said. “And pain does not matter to a man.”
「不算壞，」他說。「而且疼痛對一個人來說並不重要。」
He took hold of the line carefully so that it did not fit into any of the fresh line cuts and shifted his weight [84] so that he could put his left hand into the sea on the other side of the skiff.
他小心翼翼地抓住釣線，避免讓它進入任何新的割傷中，然後移動自己的重量，將左手伸入小船另一側的海水中。
“You did not do so badly for something worthless,” he said to his left hand. “But there was a moment when I could not find you.”
「對於一隻毫無價值的手，你做得還不錯，」他對左手說。「但有一刻我找不到你。」
Why was I not born with two good hands? he thought. Perhaps it was my fault in not training that one properly. But God knows he has had enough chances to learn. He did not do so badly in the night, though, and he has only cramped once. If he cramps again let the line cut him off.
「為什麼我沒有天生就有兩隻好手？」他想。「也許是我沒有正確訓練那一隻的錯。但上天知道它已經有足夠的機會去學習。儘管如此，它在夜裡的表現還不錯，只有一次抽筋。如果它再抽筋，就讓釣線把它割斷吧。」
1:33:50
When he thought that he knew that he was not being clear-headed and he thought he should chew some more of the dolphin. But I can’t, he told himself. It is better to be light-headed than to lose your strength from nausea. And I know I cannot keep it if I eat it since my face was in it. I will keep it for an emergency until it goes bad. But it is too late to try for strength now through nourishment. You’re stupid, he told himself. Eat the other flying fish.
當他意識到自己思緒不清時，他想他應該再咀嚼一些海豚肉。但是我不能，他告訴自己。「頭腦清醒總比因噁心而失去力量要好。我知道如果我吃了它，我就無法保持力量，因為我的臉已經在裡面了。我會將它留著以備不時之需，直到它壞掉。但現在通過攝取營養來增強力量已經太遲了。你真傻，」他告訴自己。「吃另一條飛魚。」
It was there, cleaned and ready, and he picked it up with his left hand and ate it chewing the bones carefully and eating all of it down to the tail.
那條飛魚已經處理乾淨，準備好了，他用左手拿起它，開始吃，仔細咀嚼骨頭，吃掉了所有的部分，直到尾巴。
It has more nourishment than almost any fish, he [85] thought. At least the kind of strength that I need. Now I have done what I can, he thought. Let him begin to circle and let the fight come.
「這比幾乎任何魚都更有營養，」他想。「至少對我所需要的力量而言。現在我已經做了我能做的，」他想。「讓它開始打轉吧，讓戰鬥來臨。」
The sun was rising for the third time since he had put to sea when the fish started to circle.
自從他出海以來，當魚開始打轉時，太陽已經第三次升起了。
He could not see by the slant of the line that the fish was circling. It was too early for that. He just felt a faint slackening of the pressure of the line and he commenced to pull on it gently with his right hand. It tightened, as always, but just when he reached the point where it would break, line began to come in. He slipped his shoulders and head from under the line and began to pull in line steadily and gently. He used both of his hands in a swinging motion and tried to do the pulling as much as he could with his body and his legs. His old legs and shoulders pivoted with the swinging of the pulling.
他無法通過釣線的斜度看出魚在打轉。為時尚早。他只是感受到釣線上壓力的輕微鬆弛，便開始用右手輕輕拉動釣線。釣線像往常一樣變緊，但就在他達到會斷的臨界點時，釣線開始進來。他將肩膀和頭從釣線下滑出，開始穩定而輕柔地收線。他用雙手擺動著，並試著用身體和腿來盡可能地拉動。老人的腿和肩膀隨著拉動的擺動而轉動。
“It is a very big circle,” he said. “But he is circling.” Then the line would not come in any more and he held it until he saw the drops jumping from it in the sun. Then it started out and the old man knelt down and let it go grudgingly back into the dark water.
「這是一個非常大的圈，」他說。「但它正在打轉。」然後釣線不再進來，他保持著拉著，直到看到陽光下釣線上跳起的水珠。接著，釣線又開始向外放出，老人跪下，心不甘情不願地讓它回到黑暗的水中。
“He is making the far part of his circle now,” he said. I must hold all I can, he thought. The strain will [86] shorten his circle each time. Perhaps in an hour I will see him. Now I must convince him and then I must kill him.
「它現在正在打圈的遠端，」他說。「我必須全力以赴，」他想。「每次的拉力都會縮短它的圓圈。也許一小時後我就能看到它。現在我必須讓它順從，然後我必須殺死它。」
But the fish kept on circling slowly and the old man was wet with sweat and tired deep into his bones two hours later. But the circles were much shorter now and from the way the line slanted he could tell the fish had risen steadily while he swam.
但魚繼續慢慢地打圈，兩小時後，老人浑身是汗，疲憊感深入骨髓。但現在圓圈短了很多，從釣線的斜度來看，他可以看出魚在游泳的時候不斷上升。
For an hour the old man had been seeing black spots before his eyes and the sweat salted his eyes and salted the cut over his eye and on his forehead. He was not afraid of the black spots. They were normal at the tension that he was pulling on the line. Twice, though, he had felt faint and dizzy and that had worried him.
老人已經看見眼前出現黑點一小時了，汗水進入了他的眼睛，並且讓他眼上的傷口和額頭上的傷口變得鹹鹹的。他並不害怕這些黑點。這在他施加的張力下是正常的。然而，他曾經兩次感到暈眩，這讓他擔心。
“I could not fail myself and die on a fish like this,” he said. “Now that I have him coming so beautifully, God help me endure. I’ll say a hundred Our Fathers and a hundred Hail Marys. But I cannot say them now.
「我不能辜負自己，死在這條魚上，」他說。「現在我已經讓它這麼漂亮地朝我游來了，上天保佑我能堅持下去。我會念一百遍《我們的父親》和一百遍《萬福瑪利亞》。但我現在不能念它們。」
Consider them said, he thought. I’ll say them later. Just then he felt a sudden banging and jerking on the line he held with his two hands. It was sharp and hard-feeling and heavy.
「就當它們已經念過了，」他想。「我待會再念。」就在這時，他感到他雙手握住的釣線上突然發生劇烈的撞擊和猛拉。那感覺尖銳而有力，且沉重。
He is hitting the wire leader with his spear, he [87] thought. That was bound to come. He had to do that. It may make him jump though and I would rather he stayed circling now. The jumps were necessary for him to take air. But after that each one can widen the opening of the hook wound and he can throw the hook.
「他正在用魚槍擊打鋼絲鉤，」他想。「這是必然的。他必須這樣做。雖然這可能會讓他跳起來，但我寧願他現在繼續打圈。跳躍對他來說是必要的，這樣他才能吸氣。但是在那之後，每一次跳躍都可能擴大鉤傷的開口，他可能會把鉤子拋掉。」
“Don’t jump, fish,” he said. “Don’t jump.”
「別跳，魚，」他說。「別跳。」
The fish hit the wire several times more and each time he shook his head the old man gave up a little line.
魚幾次再次撞擊鋼絲，每次他搖頭，老人便放出一些釣線。
I must hold his pain where it is, he thought. Mine does not matter. I can control mine. But his pain could drive him mad.
「我必須讓他的痛苦保持在那裡，」他想。「我的不重要。我能控制自己的痛苦。但他的痛苦可能會讓他發瘋。」
After a while the fish stopped beating at the wire and started circling slowly again. The old man was gaining line steadily now. But he felt faint again. He lifted some sea water with his left hand and put it on his head. Then he put more on and rubbed the back of his neck.
過了一會兒，魚停止了撞擊鋼絲，開始再次慢慢打圈。老人現在穩定地獲得釣線。但他又感到暈眩。他用左手舀起一些海水，放在頭上。然後他又放了更多，並揉了揉脖子後面。
“I have no cramps,” he said. “He’ll be up soon and I can last. You have to last. Don’t even speak of it.”
「我沒有抽筋，」他說。「他很快就會上來，我能撐住。你必須撐住。甚至不要提起這件事。」
He kneeled against the bow and, for a moment, slipped the line over his back again. I’ll rest now while he goes out on the circle and then stand up and work on him when he comes in, he decided.
他跪在船頭，暫時將釣線再次搭在背上。「我現在休息一下，當他在外面打圈時，然後等他回來時站起來再去處理他，」他決定。
[88] It was a great temptation to rest in the bow and let the fish make one circle by himself without recovering any line. But when the strain showed the fish had turned to come toward the boat, the old man rose to his feet and started the pivoting and the weaving pulling that brought in all the line he gained.
在船頭休息讓魚自己打圈而不收回任何釣線的誘惑很大。但是當拉力顯示魚轉身向船靠近時，老人便站起身來，開始轉身和編織拉動，以收回他所獲得的所有釣線。
I’m tireder than I have ever been, he thought, and now the trade wind is rising. But that will be good to take him in with. I need that badly.
「我比以往任何時候都更累，」他想。「現在貿易風正在上升。但這會對我有好處。我非常需要它。」
“I’ll rest on the next turn as he goes out,” he said. “I feel much better. Then in two or three turns more I will have him.”
「當他出去打轉的時候，我會在下一個轉身時休息，」他說。「我感覺好多了。然後再過兩三個轉身，我就能把他搞定。」
His straw hat was far on the back of his head and he sank down into the bow with the pull of the line as he felt the fish turn.
他的草帽深深地壓在頭後面，隨著釣線的拉動，他下沉到船頭，感受到魚的轉變。
You work now, fish, he thought. I’ll take you at the turn.
「你現在工作，魚，」他想。「我會在轉角時抓住你。」
The sea had risen considerably. But it was a fair-weather breeze and he had to have it to get home.
海浪已經上升了不少。但是這是一陣好天氣的微風，他必須依靠它才能回家。
“I’ll just steer south and west,” he said. “A man is never lost at sea and it is a long island.”
「我就往南和西駛去，」他說。「人在海上從不迷路，這是一個漫長的島嶼。」
It was on the third turn that he saw the fish first.
當他第三次轉身時，他第一次看到了魚。
He saw him first as a dark shadow that took so long [89] to pass under the boat that he could not believe its length.
他首先看到的是一個黑暗的影子，這影子在船下通過的時間如此之長，以至於他不敢相信它的長度。
1:39:33
“No,” he said. “He can’t be that big.”
「不，」他說。「他不可能那麼大。」
But he was that big and at the end of this circle he came to the surface only thirty yards away and the man saw his tail out of water. It was higher than a big scythe blade and a very pale lavender above the dark blue water. It raked back and as the fish swam just below the surface the old man could see his huge bulk and the purple stripes that banded him. His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were spread wide.
但他真的那麼大，在這個圈的末端，他浮出水面，距離只有三十碼，老人看到他的尾巴露出水面。那尾巴比一把大鐮刀還高，淡紫色的顏色映襯在深藍色的水面上。尾巴向後撩起，當魚在水面下游動時，老人可以看到他巨大的身軀和條紋交錯的紫色條紋。他的背鰭低垂，巨大的胸鰭張開得很寬。
On this circle the old man could see the fish’s eye and the two gray sucking fish that swain around him. Sometimes they attached themselves to him. Sometimes they darted off. Sometimes they would swim easily in his shadow. They were each over three feet long and when they swam fast they lashed their whole bodies like eels.
在這個圈上，老人能夠看到魚的眼睛和圍繞在他身邊的兩條灰色吸盤魚。有時候，它們會附著在他身上，有時則會快速衝出，有時則輕鬆地在他的陰影中游動。它們每條都超過三英尺長，當它們快速游動時，整個身體像鰻魚一樣揮舞。
The old man was sweating now but from something else besides the sun. On each calm placid turn the fish made he was gaining line and he was sure that in two turns more he would have a chance to get the harpoon in.
老人現在在出汗，但這並不是因為陽光。在魚的每個平靜轉彎中，他都在獲得釣線，他確信再轉兩圈，他就會有機會將魚叉刺入。
[90] But I must get him close, close, close, he thought. I mustn’t try for the head. I must get the heart.
「但我必須讓他靠近，靠近，靠近，」他想。「我不能試著刺他的頭。我必須刺他的心臟。」
“Be calm and strong, old man,” he said.
「要冷靜而堅強，老人，」他說。
On the next circle the fish’s beck was out but he was a little too far from the boat. On the next circle he was still too far away but he was higher out of water and the old man was sure that by gaining some more line he could have him alongside.
在下一圈中，魚的脖子露出水面，但距離船還是有點遠。在下一圈中，他仍然太遠，但他露出水面的部分更高了，老人確信如果再拉長一些釣線，他就能讓魚靠近。
He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil of light rope was in a round basket and the end was made fast to the bitt in the bow.
他早已準備好魚叉，輕便的繩圈放在一個圓形的籃子裡，末端固定在船頭的桅杆上。
The fish was coming in on his circle now calm and beautiful looking and only his great tail moving. The old man pulled on him all that he could to bring him closer. For just a moment the fish turned a little on his side. Then he straightened himself and began another circle.
現在魚在他打圈的過程中緩緩接近，看起來既平靜又美麗，只有那條大尾巴在擺動。老人盡全力拉近他。魚短暫地側身，然後又伸直身子，開始另一個圓圈。
“I moved him,” the old man said. “I moved him then.”
「我移動了他，」老人說。「我真的移動了他。」
He felt faint again now but he held on the great fish all the strain that he could. I moved him, he thought. Maybe this time I can get him over. Pull, hands, he thought. Hold up, legs. Last for me, head. Last for me. You never went. This time I’ll pull him over.
他再次感到暈眩，但他仍然緊緊抓住這條大魚，竭盡全力。「我移動了他，」他想。「也許這次我可以把他拉過來。拉啊，手，」他想。「撐住，腿。撐住我，頭。撐住我。你從未失敗。這次我一定能把他拉過來。」
[91] But when he put all of his effort on, starting it well out before the fish came alongside and pulling with all his strength, the fish pulled part way over and then righted himself and swam away.
但當他全力以赴，從魚靠近的前方開始拉，卻只把魚拉了一半過來，然後魚又調整姿勢，游走了。
“Fish,” the old man said. “Fish, you are going to have to die anyway. Do you have to kill me too?”
「魚，」老人說。「魚，你反正也要死。難道你也必須殺了我嗎？」
That way nothing is accomplished, he thought. His mouth was too dry to speak but he could not reach for the water now. I must get him alongside this time, he thought. I am not good for many more turns. Yes you are, he told himself. You’re good for ever.
這樣什麼都無法完成，他想。他的嘴巴太乾了，無法說話，但現在他無法伸手去拿水。「這次我必須把他拉到身邊，」他想。「我再也撐不過幾個轉圈了。」「你可以的，」他告訴自己。「你永遠都能行。」
On the next turn, he nearly had him. But again the fish righted himself and swam slowly away.
在下一個轉彎中，他幾乎就要成功了。但魚又重新調整姿勢，慢慢游走。
You are killing me, fish, the old man thought. But you have a right to. Never have I seen a greater, or more beautiful, or a calmer or more noble thing than you, brother. Come on and kill me. I do not care who kills who.
「你在折磨我，魚，」老人想。但你有權這樣做。我從未見過比你更偉大、更美麗、更冷靜或更高貴的東西，兄弟。來吧，殺了我。我不在乎誰殺了誰。
Now you are getting confused in the head, he thought. You must keep your head clear. Keep your head clear and know how to suffer like a man. Or a fish, he thought.
「現在你腦袋混亂了，」他想。「你必須保持頭腦清醒。保持頭腦清醒，學會像一個人一樣忍受痛苦。或者像魚一樣，」他想。
“Clear up, head,” he said in a voice he could hardly hear. “Clear up.”
「清醒點，腦袋，」他幾乎聽不見自己的聲音說。「清醒點。」
[92] Twice more it was the same on the turns. I do not know, the old man thought. He had been on the point of feeling himself go each time. I do not know. But I will try it once more. He tried it once more and he felt himself going when he turned the fish. The fish righted himself and swam off again slowly with the great tail weaving in the air. I’ll try it again, the old man promised, although his hands were mushy now and he could only see well in flashes. He tried it again and it was the same. So he thought, and he felt himself going before he started; I will try it once again.
在接下來的兩次轉彎中，情況依然如此。「我不知道，」老人想。他每次都感覺快要暈倒。「我不知道。但我會再試一次。」他再次嘗試，當他轉動魚的時候感覺自己又要昏倒了。魚重新站直，慢慢游走，巨大的尾巴在空中揮舞。「我會再試一次，」老人保證，雖然他的手已經麻木，只能間歇性地看清楚。他再次嘗試，結果一樣。所以他想，在開始之前他就感覺到自己快要昏倒；「我再試一次。」
He took all his pain and what was left of his strength and his long gone pride and he put it against the fish’s agony and the fish came over onto his side and swam gently on his side, his bill almost touching the planking of the skiff and started to pass the boat, long, deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in the water.
他把所有的痛苦、剩餘的力量和早已消逝的自尊心都用來抵抗魚的痛苦，魚隨著他的努力游了過來，輕輕地側身游動，嘴幾乎觸碰到小艇的甲板，開始在船旁游過，長長的、深深的、寬寬的、銀色的，帶著紫色條紋，在水中顯得無窮無盡。
The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it and lifted the harpoon as high as he could and drove it down with all his strength, and more strength he had [93] just summoned, into the fish’s side just behind the great chest fin that rose high in the air to the altitude of the man’s chest. He felt the iron go in and he leaned on it and drove it further and then pushed all his weight after it.
老人放下釣線，把腳放在上面，將魚叉抬得高高的，用盡全力，甚至調動了剛剛聚集的力量，猛然刺入魚的側面，正好在那高高升起的胸鰭後面，與人的胸部齊平。他感覺到鐵叉刺入，便用力靠在上面，再次推進，然後用全身的重量壓下去。
Then the fish came alive, with his death in him, and rose high out of the water showing all his great length and width and all his power and his beauty. He seemed to hang in the air above the old man in the skiff. Then he fell into the water with a crash that sent spray over the old man and over all of the skiff.
然後魚突然活了過來，帶著死亡的預兆，從水中高高躍起，展現出它所有的長度、寬度、力量和美麗。它似乎在老人面前的划艇上方懸浮。接著，它以巨響掉入水中，水花濺得老人和整艘小艇都濕透了。
The old man felt faint and sick and he could not see well. But he cleared the harpoon line and let it run slowly through his raw hands and, when he could see, he saw the fish was on his back with his silver belly up. The shaft of the harpoon was projecting at an angle from the fish’s shoulder and the sea was discolouring with the red of the blood from his heart. First it was dark as a shoal in the blue water that was more than a mile deep. Then it spread like a cloud. The fish was silvery and still and floated with the waves.
老人感到暈眩和噁心，看不太清楚。但他清理了魚叉的釣線，讓它慢慢地在他受傷的手中滑過，當他能看見時，他看到魚正仰著銀色的肚子浮在水面上。魚叉的叉杆從魚的肩膀上斜著突出，海水因魚心臟的血而變色。最初，血色在深藍色的水中像一片暗礁，水深超過一英里。然後它擴散開來，像一朵雲。魚靜靜地漂浮在波浪中，銀色的身軀一動不動。
The old man looked carefully in the glimpse of vision that he had. Then he took two turns of the harpoon [94] line around the bitt in the bow and hid his head on his hands.
老人仔細地檢視著他所能看到的景象。然後他將兩圈魚叉線纏繞在船頭的桅杆上，將頭埋在手中。
“Keep my head dear,” he said against the wood of the bow. “I am a tired old man. But I have killed this fish which is my brother and now I must do the slave work.”
「保持我的頭腦清醒，親愛的，」他對著船頭的木材說。「我是一個疲憊的老人。但我殺了這條魚，他是我的兄弟，現在我必須做苦工。」
Now I must prepare the nooses and the rope to lash him alongside, he thought. Even
if we were two and swamped her to load him and bailed her out, this skiff would never hold him. I must prepare everything, then bring him in and lash him well and step the
mast and set sail for home.
「現在我必須準備繩索，將他綁在一旁，」他想。「即使我們兩個人一起把他搬上船，還要把船舱清空，這艘小艇也永遠無法承載他。我必須準備好一切，然後把他帶進來，妥善綁好，豎起桅杆，然後起航回家。」
1:46:27
He started to pull the fish in to have him alongside so that he could pass a line through his gills and out his mouth and make his head fast alongside the bow. I want to see him, he thought, and to touch and to feel him. He is my fortune, he thought. But that is not why I wish to feel him. I think I felt his heart, he thought. When I pushed on the harpoon shaft the second time. Bring him in now and make him fast and get the noose around his tail and another around his middle to bind him to the skiff.
他開始拉著魚，想要將魚拉到旁邊，以便能將繩子穿過魚的腮，從嘴裡穿出，並將它的頭固定在船頭旁。「我想看看他，」他想，「觸碰並感受他。他是我的財富，」他想。「但這不是我想要感受他的原因。我想我感受到他的心跳，」他想。「當我第二次用力推進魚叉的時候。現在把他拉進來，固定住，將繩索套在他的尾巴上，再在中間綁一個，將他綁在小艇上。」
“Get to work, old man,” he said. He took a very [95] small drink of the water. “There is very much slave work to be done now that the fight is over.”
「開始工作吧，老人，」他說。他喝了一小口水。「現在已經打完了，還有很多苦工要做。」
He looked up at the sky and then out to his fish. He looked at the sun carefully. It is not much more than noon, he thought. And the trade wind is rising. The lines all mean nothing now. The boy and I will splice them when we are home.
他抬頭看向天空，然後又看向他的魚。他仔細地看著陽光。「這不過是正午多一點，」他想。「而貿易風正在增強。這些繩索現在都沒有意義。等我們回到家，男孩和我會一起接上它們。」
“Come on, fish,” he said. But the fish did not come.
「來吧，魚，」他說。但魚並沒有過來。
Instead he lay there wallowing now in the seas and the old man pulled the skiff upon to him.
相反，魚現在在海中翻滾，老人將小艇拉向它。
When he was even with him and had the fish’s head against the bow he could not believe his size. But he untied the harpoon rope from the bitt, passed it through the fish’s gills and out his jaws, made a turn around his sword then passed the rope through the other gill, made another turn around the bill and knotted the double rope and made it fast to the bitt in the bow. He cut the rope then and went astern to noose the tail. The fish had turned silver from his original purple and silver, and the stripes showed the same pale violet colour as his tail. They were wider than a man’s hand with his fingers spread and the fish’s eye looked as detached as the mirrors in a periscope or as a saint in a procession.
當他與魚平行，並將魚的頭靠在船頭時，他無法相信魚的體型。但他解開魚叉的繩索，將其穿過魚的腮，再從它的嘴裡穿出，繞過魚的劍鰭，然後從另一側的腮再穿過，繞過魚嘴，再打結，將雙繩固定在船頭的桅杆上。然後他剪斷繩子，走到船尾準備綁住魚的尾巴。魚的顏色已經從最初的紫色和銀色轉變為銀色，條紋呈現出與尾巴相同的淺紫色。條紋的寬度超過了一個張開手指的人的手，魚的眼睛看起來像是潛望鏡中的鏡子，或是一個正在進行中的聖徒般的超然。
[96] “It was the only way to kill him,” the old man said. He was feeling better since the water and he knew he would not go away and his head was clear. He’s over fifteen hundred pounds the way he is, he thought. Maybe much more. If he dresses out two-thirds of that at thirty cents a pound?
「這是殺死他的唯一方法，」老人說。他感覺好多了，因為喝了水，他知道自己不會昏倒，腦袋也變得清醒。「他的體重超過一千五百磅，」他想。「可能更多。如果算上三分之二的重量，按每磅三十美分計算？」
“I need a pencil for that,” he said. “My head is not that clear. But I think the great DiMaggio would be proud of me today. I had no bone spurs. But the hands and the back hurt truly.” I wonder what a bone spur is, he thought. Maybe we have them without knowing of it.
「我需要一支鉛筆，」他說。「我的頭腦不夠清晰。但我覺得大迪馬吉奧今天會為我感到驕傲。我沒有骨刺。但手和背真的很痛。」我想知道骨刺是什麼， 他想。也許我們有卻不知道。
He made the fish fast to bow and stern and to the middle thwart. He was so big it was like lashing a much bigger skiff alongside. He cut a piece of line and tied the fish’s lower jaw against his bill so his mouth would not open and they would sail as cleanly as possible. Then he stepped the mast and, with the stick that was his gaff and with his boom rigged, the patched sail drew, the boat began to move, and half lying in the stern he sailed south-west.
他將魚固定在船頭、船尾和中間的座位上。魚的體型如此之大，仿佛是把一艘更大的小艇綁在一起。他剪下一段繩子，把魚的下顎綁住，這樣魚的嘴就不會打開，他們的航行會儘量乾淨利落。然後他豎起桅杆，用他作為漁竿的棍子，拉起修補過的帆，船開始移動，他半躺在船尾，朝西南方向航行。
He did not need a compass to tell him where southwest was. He only needed the feel of the trade wind and the drawing of the sail. I better put a small line [97] out with a spoon on it and try and get something to eat and drink for the moisture. But he could not find a spoon and his sardines were rotten. So he hooked a patch of yellow Gulf weed with the gaff as they passed and shook it so that the small shrimps that were in it fell onto the planking of the skiff. There were more than a dozen of them and they jumped and kicked like sand fleas. The old man pinched their heads off with his thumb and forefinger and ate them chewing up the shells and the tails. They were very tiny but he knew they were nourishing and they tasted good.
他不需要指南針來告訴他西南方在哪裡。他只需要貿易風的感覺和帆的拉動。「我最好放一條小線，」他想，「上面掛著一個勺子，試著釣點東西來吃和喝，為了補充水分。」但他找不到勺子，而他的沙丁魚已經腐爛了。於是，他用魚叉勾住了一片黃色的墨西哥海草，將其搖晃，讓裡面的蝦子掉落到小艇的甲板上。那些蝦子有十多隻，它們像沙蟎一樣跳來跳去。老人用拇指和食指捏掉它們的頭，然後吃掉，連殼和尾巴也一起嚼了。它們非常小，但他知道它們富有營養，味道也很好。
The old man still had two drinks of water in the bottle and he used half of one after he had eaten the shrimps. The skiff was sailing well considering the handicaps and he steered with the tiller under his arm. He could see the fish and he had only to look at his hands and feel his back against the stern to know that this had truly happened and was not a dream. At one time when he was feeling so badly toward the end, he had thought perhaps it was a dream. Then when he had seen the fish come out of the water and hang motionless in the sky before he fell, he was sure there was some great strangeness and he could not believe it.
老人瓶子裡還有兩口水，他在吃了蝦子之後用了一半。考慮到障礙，小艇航行得相當好，他用手肘夾住舵來操縱方向。他能看到魚，只需看著自己的手，感覺背部抵著船尾，就知道這一切都是真的，而不是夢境。當他在結束時感覺如此糟糕時，他曾經想過這或許是場夢。但當他看到魚從水面上冒出來，懸浮在空中不動時，他確信有某種巨大的異樣，他無法相信。
[98] Then he could not see well, although now he saw as well as ever. Now he knew there was the fish and his hands and back were no dream. The hands cure quickly, he thought. I bled them clean and the salt water will heal them. The dark water of the true gulf is the greatest healer that there is. All I must do is keep the head clear. The hands have done their work and we sail well. With his mouth shut and his tail straight up and down we sail like brothers. Then his head started to become a little unclear and he thought, is he bringing me in or am I bringing him in? If I were towing him behind there would be no question. Nor if the fish were in the skiff, with all dignity gone, there would be no question either. But they were sailing together lashed side by side and the old man thought, let him bring me in if it pleases him. I am only better than him through trickery and he meant me no harm.
然後他視力不太好，雖然現在他看得和以前一樣清晰。現在他知道那是魚，他的手和背部都不是夢。他想，「手會很快康復，我把它們清理乾淨了，鹽水會治癒它們。真正海灣的深水是最好的療癒者。我只需保持頭腦清醒。手已經完成了它們的工作，我們航行得很好。嘴巴閉著，尾巴筆直上下，我們就像兄弟一樣航行。」然後他的頭開始變得有點不清晰，他想，「是他帶我回去，還是我帶他回去？如果我在拖著他，就不會有問題。如果魚在小艇裡，失去了所有的尊嚴，也不會有問題。但他們現在是並排綁在一起航行，老人想，讓他帶我回去，如果這讓他高興的話。我只是因為詭計比他優越，而他對我沒有惡意。」
They sailed well and the old man soaked his hands in the salt water and tried to keep his head clear. There were high cumulus clouds and enough cirrus above them so that the old man knew the breeze would last all night. The old man looked at the fish constantly [99] to make sure it was true. It was an hour before the first shark hit him.
他們航行得很好，老人將手浸入鹽水中，試著保持頭腦清醒。高高的積雲和足夠的絲狀雲在他們的上方，使老人知道微風會持續整個晚上。老人不斷查看魚，以確保這一切都是真的。在第一條鯊魚襲擊他之前，已經過了一小時。
The shark was not an accident. He had come up from deep down in the water as the dark cloud of blood had settled and dispersed in the mile deep sea. He had come up so fast and absolutely without caution that he broke the surface of the blue water and was in the sun. Then he fell back into the sea and picked up the scent and started swimming on the course the skiff and the fish had taken.
那條鯊魚並不是意外。它從深水中上升，當血雲沉澱並在一英里深的海水中擴散時，它毫無戒心地迅速浮出水面，進入陽光下。然後它又掉回海中，嗅到了氣味，開始沿著小艇和魚所走的路徑游泳。
Sometimes he lost the scent. But he would pick it up again, or have just a trace of it, and he swam fast and hard on the course. He was a very big Make shark built to swim as fast as the fastest fish in the sea and everything about him was beautiful except his jaws. His back was as blue as a sword fish’s and his belly was silver and his hide was smooth and handsome. He was built as a sword fish except for his huge jaws which were tight shut now as he swam fast, just under the surface with his high dorsal fin knifing through the water without wavering. Inside the closed double lip of his jaws all of his eight rows of teeth were slanted inwards. They were not the ordinary pyramid-shaped teeth of most sharks. They were shaped like a man’s [100] fingers when they are crisped like claws. They were nearly as long as the fingers of the old man and they had razor-sharp cutting edges on both sides. This was a fish built to feed on all the fishes in the sea, that were so fast and strong and well armed that they had no other enemy. Now he speeded up as he smelled the fresher scent and his blue dorsal fin cut the water.
有時它會失去氣味，但它會再次找到，或僅僅剩下微弱的氣味，並在這條路線上快速而拼命地游泳。這是一條非常大的馬克鯊，身體結實，游泳速度可以和海裡最快的魚媲美，除了它的下顎，其他所有特徵都是美麗的。它的背部像劍魚一樣藍，肚子銀白，皮膚光滑而英俊。它的構造像劍魚，只是它巨大的下顎現在緊閉著，游泳時緊貼水面，挺高的背鰭像刀一樣劃過水面，毫不搖晃。它的雙唇緊閉，八排牙齒朝內傾斜。這些牙齒並不是大多數鯊魚那種普通的金字塔形牙齒，而是像人類的手指一樣，當手指變得像爪子那樣脆時的形狀。它們幾乎和老人的手指一樣長，兩側都有鋒利的切割邊緣。這是一條專門用來捕食海中所有魚類的魚，這些魚速度快、力量強且武裝得很好，沒有其他敵人。現在它在嗅到更新鮮的氣味時加速游動，藍色的背鰭在水面上劃出一道弧線。
1:54:00
When the old man saw him coming he knew that this was a shark that had no fear at all and would do exactly what he wished. He prepared the harpoon and made the rope fast while he watched the shark come on. The rope was short as it lacked what he had cut away to lash the fish.
當老人看到鯊魚接近時，他知道這是一條毫無畏懼的鯊魚，將完全按照他的意願行事。他準備好魚叉，並將繩子固定好，同時注視著鯊魚的靠近。繩子很短，因為他已經剪掉了用來綁住魚的部分。
The old man’s head was clear and good now and he was full of resolution but he had little hope. It was too good to last, he thought. He took one look at the great fish as he watched the shark close in. It might as well have been a dream, he thought. I cannot keep him from hitting me but maybe I can get him. Dentuso, he thought. Bad luck to your mother.
老人此時頭腦清晰而良好，充滿了決心，但他卻幾乎沒有希望。他想，這種情況不可能持續太久。他瞥了一眼那條大魚，隨著鯊魚的逼近，他想，這或許只是一場夢。我無法阻止它攻擊我，但或許我可以抓住它。鯊魚，他想，真是該死的運氣。
The shark closed fast astern and when he hit the fish the old man saw his mouth open and his strange eyes and the clicking chop of the teeth as he drove forward in the meat just above the tail. The shark’s head [101] was out of water and his back was coming out and the old man could hear the noise of skin and flesh ripping on the big fish when he rammed the harpoon down onto the shark’s head at a spot where the line between his eyes intersected with the line that ran straight back from his nose. There were no such lines. There was only the heavy sharp blue head and the big eyes and the clicking, thrusting all-swallowing jaws. But that was the location of the brain and the old man hit it. He hit it with his blood mushed hands driving a good harpoon with all his strength. He hit it without hope but with resolution and complete malignancy.
鯊魚迅速逼近，當它撞上魚的時候，老人看到它的嘴巴張開，奇怪的眼睛和咀嚼的聲音，牙齒在肉上發出咯噔咯噔的聲音，正好在魚的尾部上方。鯊魚的頭部已經出水，背部也露了出來，老人聽到當他將魚叉朝著鯊魚的頭部猛砸下去時，皮膚和肉撕裂的聲音，正好是眼睛之間的線與從鼻子直線延伸的線交會的地方。並不存在這樣的線。只有那個沉重而鋒利的藍色頭部和大眼睛，還有那些發出咯噔聲、猛衝而來的吞噬的下顎。但那正是大腦的位置，老人擊中了它。他用血漬的雙手，憑藉著全力擊下好魚叉。他擊中它的時候毫無希望，但帶著決心和完全的惡意。
The shark swung over and the old man saw his eye was not alive and then he swung over once again, wrapping himself in two loops of the rope. The old man knew that he was dead but the shark would not accept it. Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and his jaws clicking, the shark plowed over the water as a speedboat does. The water was white where his tail beat it and three-quarters of his body was clear above the water when the rope came taut, shivered, and then snapped. The shark lay quietly for a little while on the surface and the old man watched him. Then he went down very slowly.
鯊魚翻轉過來，老人看到它的眼睛已經沒有生命，然後它又翻轉了一次，將自己裹進兩圈繩子裡。老人知道它已經死了，但鯊魚卻不接受。然後，鯊魚翻著背，尾巴猛拍，牙齒咯咯作響，像快艇一樣在水面上沖刺。水面因為它的尾巴拍打而變得白色，當繩子緊繃時，三分之四的身體從水中露出。然後繩子抖動了一下，隨即斷裂。鯊魚靜靜地躺在水面上了一小會兒，老人注視著它。然後它非常緩慢地下沉了。
[102] “He took about forty pounds,” the old man said aloud. He took my harpoon too and all the rope, he thought, and now my fish bleeds again and there will be others. He did not like to look at the fish anymore since he had been mutilated. When the fish had been hit it was as though he himself were hit. But I killed the shark that hit my fish, he thought. And he was the biggest dentuso that I have ever seen. And God knows that I have seen big ones. It was too good to last, he thought. I wish it had been a dream now and that I had never hooked the fish and was alone in bed on the newspapers.
「它大約帶走了四十磅，」老人大聲說。他還帶走了我的魚叉和所有的繩子，他想，現在我的魚又在流血，還會有其他的魚。他不想再看那條魚，因為它已經受了傷。當魚被擊中時，彷彿他自己也受了傷。但我殺死了那條攻擊我魚的鯊魚，他想。它是我見過的最大的鯊魚，上帝知道我見過多麼大的鯊魚。這種情況不可能持續太久，他想。現在我希望這只是一場夢，我從來沒有勾到這條魚，而是獨自躺在床上，枕著報紙。
“But man is not made for defeat,” he said. “A man can be destroyed but not defeated.” I am sorry that I killed the fish though, he thought. Now the bad time is coming and I do not even have the harpoon. The dentuso is cruel and able and strong and intelligent. But I was more intelligent than he was. Perhaps not, he thought. Perhaps I was only better armed.
「但是人不是為了失敗而生的，」他說。「一個人可以被摧毀，但不會被打敗。」不過，我很遺憾我殺了那條魚，他想。現在壞運氣來了，我甚至連魚叉都沒有。鯊魚是殘忍、能幹、強壯和聰明的。但我比它更聰明。也許不是，他想。也許我只是武裝得更好。
“Don’t think, old man,” he said aloud. “Sail on this course and take it when it comes.
「別想太多，老人，」他大聲說。「沿著這個方向航行，等它來的時候就接受它。  
But I must think, he thought. Because it is all I have left. That and baseball. I wonder how the great [103] DiMaggio would have liked the way I hit him in the brain? It was no great thing, he thought. Any man could do it. But do you think my hands were as great a handicap as the bone spurs? I cannot know. I never had anything wrong with my heel except the time the sting ray stung it when I stepped on him when swimming and paralyzed the lower leg and made the unbearable pain.
但我必須思考，」他想。「因為這是我剩下的唯一東西。還有棒球。我想知道偉大的迪馬吉奧會怎麼看我擊中他的腦袋？這也沒什麼了不起，」他想。「任何人都能做到。但你認為我的手是和骨刺一樣大的障礙嗎？我無法知道。我從來沒有過腳跟的問題，除了那次我游泳時踩到黃貂魚，刺傷了它，導致小腿癱瘓，痛得無法忍受。」  
“Think about something cheerful, old man,” he said. “Every minute now you are closer to home. You sail lighter for the loss of forty pounds.”
「想點愉快的事，老人，」他說。「每分每秒你都在接近家了。你因為失去四十磅而變得輕鬆些。」  
He knew quite well the pattern of what could happen when he reached the inner part of the current. But there was nothing to be done now.
他非常清楚當他進入潮流的內部時可能發生的情況模式。但現在無法再做什麼。  
“Yes there is,” he said aloud. “I can lash my knife to the butt of one of the oars.”
「是的，還是有的，」他大聲說。「我可以把刀綁在一根槳的槳柄上。」  
So he did that with the tiller under his arm and the sheet of the sail under his foot.
於是他這樣做了，舵在他的手臂下，帆的邊緣在他的腳下。  
“Now,” he said. “I am still an old man. But I am not unarmed.”
「現在，」他說。「我仍然是個老人，但我並不是沒有武器。」  
The breeze was fresh now and he sailed on well. He watched only the forward part of the fish and some of his hope returned.
微風變得清新，他順利地航行著。他只看著魚的前端，一些希望回到了他心中。  
It is silly not to hope, he thought. Besides I believe [104] it is a sin. Do not think about sin, he thought. There are enough problems now without sin. Also I have no understanding of it.
「不抱希望真是傻，」他想。「而且我相信這是一種罪。不要想罪，」他想。「現在已經有足夠的問題，不需要再加上罪。至於我對罪的理解也不多。」  
I have no understanding of it and I am not sure that I believe in it. Perhaps it was a sin to kill the fish. I suppose it was even though I did it to keep me alive and feed many people. But then everything is a sin. Do not think about sin. It is much too late for that and there are people who are paid to do it. Let them think about it. You were born to be a fisherman as the fish was born to be a fish. San Pedro was a fisherman as was the father of the great DiMaggio.
「我對罪沒有理解，也不確定自己是否相信。也許殺死那條魚是一種罪。雖然我這樣做是為了讓我活下去，並餵養很多人，但我想這仍然算是罪。不過一切都是罪。不要想罪。為這件事已經太遲了，還有那些人是專門為此而支付的。讓他們去想吧。你天生就是個漁夫，正如魚天生就是魚。聖彼得是一位漁夫，偉大的迪馬吉奧的父親也是。」  
But he liked to think about all things that he was involved in and since there was nothing to read and he did not have a radio, he thought much and he kept on thinking about sin. You did not kill the fish only to keep alive and to sell for food, he thought. You killed him for pride and because you are a fisherman. You loved him when he was alive and you loved him after. If you love him, it is not a sin to kill him. Or is it more?
但他喜歡思考自己所涉及的所有事情，由於沒有東西可讀，也沒有收音機，他想了很多，並不停地思考罪。「你不是為了生存和賣食物而殺死那條魚，」他想。「你是因為驕傲和因為你是一名漁夫而殺了它。你在它活著的時候愛著它，在它死後也愛著它。如果你愛它，殺死它就不是罪。還是更多呢？」  
“You think too much, old man,” he said aloud.
「你想得太多了，老人，」他大聲說。  
But you enjoyed killing the dentuso, he thought. He lives on the live fish as you do. He is not a scavenger [105] nor just a moving appetite as some sharks are. He is beautiful and noble and knows no fear of anything.
「但你享受殺死那條鯊魚，」他想。「它像你一樣以活魚為生。它不是清道夫，也不僅僅是某些鯊魚那種移動的食慾。它是美麗而高貴的，對任何東西都毫無畏懼。」  
“I killed him in self-defense,” the old man said aloud. “And I killed him well.”
「我是在自衛中殺了它，」老人大聲說。「而且我殺得很好。」  
Besides, he thought, everything kills everything else in some way. Fishing kills me exactly as it keeps me alive. The boy keeps me alive, he thought. I must not deceive myself too much.
此外，他想，萬物都以某種方式殺死其他事物。釣魚正如它讓我活著一樣也在殺死我。那個男孩讓我活著，他想。「我不能欺騙自己太多。」
2:00:30
He leaned over the side and pulled loose a piece of the meat of the fish where the shark had cut him. He chewed it and noted its quality and its good taste. It was firm and juicy, like meat, but it was not red. There was no stringiness in it and he knew that it would bring the highest price In the market. But there was no way to keep its scent out of the water and the old man knew that a very had time was coming.
他俯身向旁邊，扯下一片被鯊魚咬下的魚肉。他咀嚼著，注意到肉質的品質和美味。肉質緊實多汁，像肉一樣，但並不紅。他知道這肉不會有筋，並且會在市場上賣到最高價。但他無法將它的氣味隔絕在水外，老人知道艱難的時刻即將來臨。
The breeze was steady. It had backed a little further into the north-east and he knew that meant that it would not fall off. The old man looked ahead of him but he could see no sails nor could he see the hull nor the smoke of any ship. There were only the flying fish that went up from his bow sailing away to either side and the yellow patches of Gulf weed. He could not even see a bird.
微風穩定，稍微向北東轉了一點，他知道這意味著風不會變小。老人向前看，但他看不到帆，也看不到任何船的船身或煙霧。只有從他的船頭飛起的飛魚，向兩側飛去，以及一些黃色的海草。他甚至連一隻鳥都看不到。
[106] He had sailed for two hours, resting in the stern and sometimes chewing a bit of the meat from the marlin, trying to rest and to be strong, when he saw the first of the two sharks. “Ay,” he said aloud. There is no translation for this word and perhaps it is just a noise such as a man might make, involuntarily, feeling the nail go through his hands and into the wood.
他已經航行了兩個小時，坐在船尾休息，有時咀嚼一點馬林魚的肉，試圖休息並保持體力，當他看到兩條鯊魚中的第一條時。「啊，」他大聲說。這個詞沒有翻譯，也許它只是一種聲音，就像一個人不由自主地感受到釘子刺穿他的手，深入木頭時發出的聲音。
“Galanos,” he said aloud. He had seen the second fin now coming up behind the first and had identified them as shovel-nosed sharks by the brown, triangular fin and the sweeping movements of the tail. They had the scent and were excited and in the stupidity of their great hunger they were losing and finding the scent in their excitement. But they were closing all the time.
「加拉諾斯，」他大聲說。他看到第二個鰭現在從第一條後面出現，並認出它們是鏟頭鯊，因為它們有著棕色的三角形鰭和揮動的尾巴。它們嗅到了氣味，變得興奮，在巨大的饑餓中愚蠢地失去和找到氣味，但它們始終在靠近。
The old man made the sheet fast and jammed the tiller. Then he took up the oar with the knife lashed to it. He lifted it as lightly as he could because his hands rebelled at the pain. Then he opened and closed them on it lightly to loosen them. He closed them firmly so they would take the pain now and would not flinch and watched the sharks come. He could see their wide, flattened, shovel-pointed heads now and their white tipped wide pectoral fins. They were hateful sharks, [107] bad smelling, scavengers as well as killers, and when they were hungry they would bite at an oar or the rudder of a boat. It was these sharks that would cut the turtles’ legs and flippers off when the turtles were asleep on the surface, and they would hit a man in the water, if they were hungry, even if the man had no smell of fish blood nor of fish slime on him.
老人把帆繩固定住，並卡住了舵。然後他拿起綁著刀的槳。他輕輕舉起它，因為他的手對疼痛反抗。然後他輕輕地開合手指以放鬆它們。他緊緊地握住槳，讓它們忍受當下的痛苦，不再畏懼，然後注視著鯊魚接近。他能看到它們寬闊、扁平、鏟子形的頭，以及白色尖端的寬胸鰭。它們是可惡的鯊魚，惡臭、既是食腐者又是殺手，當它們餓的時候，會咬住槳或船的舵。這些鯊魚會在烏龜在水面上睡覺時割斷烏龜的腿和鰭，如果它們餓了，甚至會攻擊水中的人，即使那個人身上沒有魚血的氣味或魚膠的臭味。
“Ay,” the old man said. “Galanos. Come on galanos.”
「啊，」老人說。「加拉諾斯。來吧，加拉諾斯。」  
They came. But they did not come as the Mako had come. One turned and went out of sight under the skiff and the old man could feel the skiff shake as he jerked and pulled on the fish. The other watched the old man with his slitted yellow eyes and then came in fast with his half circle of jaws wide to hit the fish where he had already been bitten. The line showed clearly on the top of his brown head and back where the brain joined the spinal cord and the old man drove the knife on the oar into the juncture, withdrew it, and drove it in again into the shark’s yellow cat-like eyes. The shark let go of the fish and slid down, swallowing what he had taken as he died.
它們來了。但它們來的方式和馬科鯊不同。一條轉身，消失在小船下，老人感覺到小船因為它的拉扯而搖晃。另一條用它的狹長黃色眼睛盯著老人，然後快速衝過來，半圓形的嘴巴張開，準備在魚已經被咬過的地方再咬一口。老人的魚身上那條明顯的傷痕在它棕色的頭部和背部上，正好是腦部和脊髓相接的地方，老人將刀插入這個交接處，然後拔出，再次插入那條鯊魚的黃色貓眼般的眼睛。鯊魚放開了魚，滑入水中，吞下它所吃的東西，隨著死亡而消逝。
The skiff was still shaking with the destruction the other shark was doing to the fish and the old man let [108] go the sheet so that the skiff would swing broadside and bring the shark out from under. When he saw the shark he leaned over the side and punched at him. He hit only meat and the hide was set hard and he barely got the knife in. The blow hurt not only his hands but his shoulder too. But the shark came up fast with his head out and the old man hit him squarely in the center of his flat-topped head as his nose came out of water and lay against the fish. The old man withdrew the blade and punched the shark exactly in the same spot again. He still hung to the fish with his jaws hooked and the old man stabbed him in his left eye. The shark still hung there.
小船仍然因為另一條鯊魚對魚的破壞而顫抖，老人鬆開帆繩，讓小船橫搖，將鯊魚從下面引出來。當他看到鯊魚時，他俯身向旁邊，朝鯊魚揮拳。他只打到肉，皮膚硬得像石頭，他幾乎無法將刀子插進去。這一擊不僅使他的手痛，也讓他的肩膀感到疼痛。但鯊魚快速浮出水面，頭部露出水面，老人準確地擊中了它平坦的頭頂正中間，當鯊魚的鼻子從水中探出並靠在魚身上時。老人拔出刀刃，並再次在同一個地方刺向鯊魚。他的嘴仍然鉤住魚，老人用刀刺入它的左眼。鯊魚依然緊緊抓著魚。
“No?” the old man said and he drove the blade between the vertebrae and the brain. It was an easy shot now and he felt the cartilage sever. The old man reversed the oar and put the blade between the shark’s jaws to open them. He twisted the blade and as the shark slid loose he said, “Go on, galano. Slide down a mile deep. Go see your friend, or maybe it’s your mother.”
「不？」老人說，然後將刀刃刺入脊椎和腦部之間。這一擊現在變得容易多了，他感覺到軟骨被切斷。老人翻轉槳，將刀片放入鯊魚的嘴中以張開它的嘴。他扭轉刀刃，當鯊魚滑落時，他說：「去吧，加拉諾。滑下去一英里深。去見你的朋友，或者也許是你的母親。」
The old man wiped the blade of his knife and laid down the oar. Then he found the sheet and the sail filled and he brought the skiff onto her course.
老人擦拭刀刃，放下槳。然後他找到帆繩，帆也鼓起來，他將小船調整到航向。
[109] “They must have taken a quarter of him and of the best meat,” he said aloud. “I wish it were a dream and that I had never hooked him. I’m sorry about it, fish. It makes everything wrong.” He stopped and he did not want to look at the fish now. Drained of blood and awash he looked the colour of the silver backing of a minor and his stripes still showed.
「它們一定咬掉了四分之一的肉，還是最好的肉，」他大聲說。「我希望這是一場夢，從未掛上過它。我很抱歉，魚。這一切都錯了。」他停下來，現在他不想再看那條魚。魚的血液已經流失，浸在水中，顏色像銀色的小魚，條紋仍然清晰可見。
“I shouldn’t have gone out so far, fish,” he said. “Neither for you nor for me. I’m sorry, fish.”
「我不應該航行得這麼遠，魚，」他說。「對你和我都不應該。我很抱歉，魚。」
Now, he said to himself. Look to the lashing on the knife and see if it has been cut. Then get your hand in order because there still is more to come.
現在，他告訴自己，檢查一下刀的綁繩，看看它是否被切斷。然後整理好你的手，因為還有更多的事情要來。
“I wish I had a stone for the knife,” the old man said after he had checked the lashing on the oar butt. “I should have brought a stone.” You should have brought many things, he thought. But you did not bring them, old man. Now is no time to think of what you do not have. Think of what you can do with what there is.
「我希望我有一塊石頭來磨刀，」老人說，檢查槳柄的綁繩後。「我應該帶一塊石頭。」你應該帶很多東西，他想。但你沒有帶，老人。現在不是想你沒有的東西的時候。想想你可以用現有的東西做什麼。
“You give me much good counsel,” he said aloud. “I’m tired of it.” He held the tiller under his arm and soaked both his hands in the water as the skiff drove forward. “God knows how much that last one took,” he said.
「你給了我很多好建議，」他大聲說。「我厭倦了。」他把舵夾在腋下，將雙手浸入水中，當小船向前推進。「天知道最後那一條咬了我多少，」他說。
[110] “But she’s much lighter now.” He did not want to think of the mutilated under-side of the fish. He knew that each of the jerking bumps of the shark had been meat torn away and that the fish now made a trail for all sharks as wide as a highway through the sea.
「但現在輕多了。」他不想再想那條魚的殘缺不全的下身。他知道每次鯊魚的猛撞都撕掉了一些肉，而現在這條魚在海中留下了像高速公路一樣寬的痕跡，吸引著所有的鯊魚。
He was a fish to keep a man all winter, he thought Don’t think of that. Just rest and try to get your hands in shape to defend what is left of him. The blood smell from my hands means nothing now with all that scent in the water. Besides they do not bleed much. There is nothing cut that means anything. The bleeding may keep the left from cramping.
「這是一條能讓人度過整個冬天的魚，」他想。不要想這些。只要休息，試著讓你的手恢復狀態，以保護剩下的部分。手上的血腥味在這樣的水中毫無意義。此外，它們也不會流很多血。沒有任何傷口意義重大。流血可能會防止左手抽筋。
What can I think of now? he thought. Nothing. I must think of nothing and wait for the next ones. I wish it had really been a dream, he thought. But who knows? It might have turned out well.
「我現在能想些什麼呢？」他想。什麼都不行。我必須什麼都不想，等待下一波的來臨。我希望這真的是一場夢，他想。但誰知道呢？也許結果會很好。
2:07:19
The next shark that came was a single shovelnose. He came like a pig to the trough if a pig had a mouth so wide that you could put your head in it. The old man let him hit the fish and then drove the knife on the oar don into his brain. But the shark jerked backwards as he rolled and the knife blade snapped.
接下來來的鯊魚是一條單獨的鏟鼻鯊。它就像一頭豬朝著食槽走來，若豬的嘴巴大到可以把頭放進去。老人讓它撞上魚，然後用槳上的刀刺入它的腦袋。但鯊魚在翻滾時猛然向後一甩，刀片折斷了。
The old man settled himself to steer. He did not even watch the big shark sinking slowly in the water, [111] showing first life-size, then small, then tiny. That always fascinated the old man. But he did not even watch it now.
老人重新穩住方向盤。他甚至沒有看那條大鯊魚在水中緩緩下沉，先是正常大小，然後變小，最後變得微小。這總是讓老人著迷，但他現在甚至都沒有看它。
“I have the gaff now,” he said. “But it will do no good. I have the two oars and the tiller and the short club.”
「我現在有魚叉了，」他說。「但這也沒有用。我有兩根槳、一個舵和一根短棍。」
Now they have beaten me, he thought. I am too old to club sharks to death. But I will try it as long as I have the oars and the short club and the tiller.
「現在它們已經打敗我了，」他想。「我年紀太大，無法用棍子把鯊魚打死。但只要我還有槳、短棍和舵，我就會試試看。」
He put his hands in the water again to soak them. It was getting late in the afternoon and he saw nothing but the sea and the sky. There was more wind in the sky than there had been, and soon he hoped that he would see land.
他再次把手浸入水中，讓它們浸泡。下午已經不早了，他什麼也看不見，只有海和天空。天空中的風比之前強了些，他希望不久能看到陸地。
“You’re tired, old man,” he said. “You’re tired inside.”
「你累了，老人，」他說。「你內心疲憊。」
The sharks did not hit him again until just before sunset.
鯊魚在日落前不久才再次襲來。
The old man saw the brown fins coming along the wide trail the fish must make in the water.
老人看到棕色的鰭沿著魚在水中必須留下的寬大痕跡游來。
They were not even quartering on the scent. They were headed straight for the skiff swimming side by side. He jammed the tiller, made the sheet fast and reached under the stem for the club. It was an oar handle [112] from a broken oar sawed off to about two and a half feet in length. He could only use it effectively with one hand because of the grip of the handle and he took good hold of it with his right hand, flexing his hand on it, as he watched the sharks come. They were both galanos.
牠們甚至都沒有在氣味上盤旋，而是直接朝著小船游來，並肩而行。他把舵卡住，固定好帆繩，然後伸手去找棍子。那是一根從折斷的槳上鋸下來，長約兩英尺半的槳柄。他只能單手有效地使用它，因為把手的握把限制了他的動作。他用右手緊緊握住棍子，靈活地操控著，注視著游來的鯊魚。這兩條都是加拉諾。
I must let the first one get a good hold and hit him on the point of the nose or straight across the top of the head, he thought.
「我必須讓第一條鯊魚抓住好位置，然後瞄準它的鼻尖或頭頂狠狠一擊，」他想。
The two sharks closed together and as he saw the one nearest him open his jaws and sink them into the silver side of the fish, he raised the club high and brought it down heavy and slamming onto the top of the shark’s broad head. He felt the rubbery solidity as the club came down. But he felt the rigidity of bone too and he struck the shark once more hard across the point of the nose as he slid down from the fish.
兩條鯊魚一起靠近，當他看到離他最近的鯊魚張開嘴，咬進魚的銀色側面時，他舉起棍子，重重地砸向鯊魚寬廣的頭頂。他感受到棍子落下的橡膠般的堅硬，但他也感覺到了骨骼的堅硬，於是他再次用力地朝著鯊魚的鼻尖揮下去，鯊魚卻從魚身上滑了下來。
The other shark had been in and out and now came in again with his jaws wide. The old man could see pieces of the meat of the fish spilling white from the corner of his jaws as he bumped the fish and closed his jaws. He swung at him and hit only the head and the shark looked at him and wrenched the meat loose. The [113] old man swung the club down on him again as he slipped away to swallow and hit only the heavy solid rubberiness.
另一條鯊魚已經進進出出，現在再次張嘴游了進來。老人看到它的嘴角有白色的魚肉掉落，當它撞上魚並合上嘴巴時，老人朝它揮去，只打到它的頭。鯊魚看著他，扭動著身體將肉撕下。老人再次用棍子朝著它揮下，但只打到了那沉重而堅韌的橡膠感。
“Come on, galano,” the old man said. “Come in again.”
「來吧，加拉諾，」老人說。「再進來一次。」
The shark came in a rush and the old man hit him as he shut his jaws. He hit him solidly and from as high up as he could raise the club. This time he felt the bone at the base of the brain and he hit him again in the same place while the shark tore the meat loose sluggishly and slid down from the fish.
鯊魚猛地衝了過來，老人就在它合上嘴的時候打了它一拳。他用力地擊中它，從他能舉得最高的地方揮下這根棍子。這一次他感覺到了腦部基部的骨骼，於是他又在同一個地方擊打它，鯊魚則遲緩地撕扯著肉，滑離了魚身。
The old man watched for him to come again but neither shark showed. Then he saw one on the surface swimming in circles. He did not see the fin of the other.
老人靜靜地等待著鯊魚再次出現，但兩條鯊魚都沒有顯現。然後他看到一條在水面上游來游去的鯊魚。他沒有看到另一條的鰭。
I could not expect to kill them, he thought. I could have in my time. But I have hurt them both badly and neither one can feel very good. If I could have used a bat with two hands I could have killed the first one surely. Even now, he thought.
我不能指望能殺死它們，老人想。我年輕時可以做到。但我已經重創了它們，現在它們肯定感覺不好。如果我能用雙手握著球棒，我一定能殺死第一條。即使是現在，他想。
He did not want to look at the fish. He knew that half of him had been destroyed. The sun had gone down while he had been in the fight with the sharks.
他不想看那條魚。他知道它的一半已經被毀掉。在和鯊魚的搏鬥中，太陽已經下山。
“It will be dark soon,” he said. “Then I should see [114] the glow of Havana.. If I am too far to the eastward I will see the lights of one of the new beaches.”
「很快就要黑了，」他說。「然後我應該能看到哈瓦那的光亮。如果我太偏東了，我將會看到某個新海灘的燈光。」
I cannot be too far out now, he thought. I hope no one has been too worried. There is only the boy to worry, of course. But I am sure he would have confidence. Many of the older fishermen will worry. Many others too, he thought. I live in a good town.
我現在不能太遠，老人想。我希望沒有人太擔心。當然，只有那個男孩值得擔心。但我相信他會有信心。許多老漁夫會擔心。還有許多人，他想。我住在一個好地方。
He could not talk to the fish anymore because the fish had been ruined too badly. Then something came into his head.
他無法再和魚交談，因為魚已經受到了重創。然後一個念頭閃過他的腦海。
“Half fish,” he said. “Fish that you were. I am sorry that I went too far out. I ruined us both. But we have killed many sharks, you and I, and ruined many others. How many did you ever kill, old fish? You do not have that spear on your head for nothing.”
「半條魚，」他說。「你曾經是一條魚。我很抱歉我出海太遠。我毀了我們兩個。但你我一起殺了許多鯊魚，也毀了許多其他的。老魚，你曾經殺過多少條？你頭上那根矛可不是白拿的。」
He liked to think of the fish and what he could do to a shark if he were swimming free. I should have chopped the bill off to fight them with, he thought. But there was no hatchet and then there was no knife.
他喜歡想像這條魚，如果它能自由地游泳，它能對鯊魚做些什麼。「我應該把魚嘴砍下來以便與它們搏鬥，」他想。「但沒有斧頭，然後也沒有刀。」
But if I had, and could have lashed it to an oar butt, what a weapon. Then we might have fought them together. What will you do now if they come in the night? What can you do?
「但如果我有，並且能把它綁在槳柄上，那將會是多麼厲害的武器。然後我們或許可以一起與它們戰鬥。現在如果它們在夜裡來，你該怎麼辦？你能做什麼？」
“Fight them,” he said. “I’ll fight them until I die.”
「打它們，」他說。「我會一直打到我死為止。」
[115] But in the dark now and no glow showing and no lights and only the wind and the steady pull of the sail he felt that perhaps he was already dead. He put his two hands together and felt the palms. They were not dead and he could bring the pain of life by simply opening and closing them. He leaned his back against the stern and knew he was not dead. His shoulders told him.
但現在已經黑暗了，沒有光亮顯現，沒有燈光，只有風和帆的穩定拉扯，他感覺自己或許已經死了。他將兩隻手合在一起，感受著手掌。它們沒有死，他只需簡單地開合手掌就能感受到生命的疼痛。他靠在船尾上，知道自己還沒有死。肩膀告訴了他。
2:13:15
I have all those prayers I promised if I caught the fish, he thought. But I am too tired to say them now. I better get the sack and put it over my shoulders.
「如果我抓到魚，我就會祈禱的，」他想。「但我現在太累了，無法說出來。我最好去拿麻袋，把它背在肩上。」
He lay in the stern and steered and watched for the glow to come in the sky. I have half of him, he thought. Maybe I’ll have the luck to bring the forward half in. I should have some luck. No, he said. You violated your luck when you went too far outside.
他躺在船尾，操控著舵，盡力在空中尋找光亮。「我有他的一半，」他想。「或許我會有幸能把前半段帶回來。我應該會有一些運氣。」「不，」他說。「你出海太遠，已經違背了你的運氣。」
“Don’t be silly,” he said aloud. “And keep awake and steer. You may have much luck yet.”
「別傻了，」他大聲說。「保持清醒，繼續掌舵。你還是可能會有很多運氣。」
“I’d like to buy some if there’s any place they sell it,” he said.
「如果有地方賣運氣，我倒是想買一些，」他說。
What could I buy it with? he asked himself. Could I buy it with a lost harpoon and a broken knife and two bad hands?
「我能用什麼來買呢？」他問自己。「我能用一根丟失的魚叉、一把壞掉的刀和兩隻受傷的手來買嗎？」
“You might,” he said. “You tried to buy it with [116] eighty-four days at sea. They nearly sold it to you too.”
「你也許能，」他說。「你試著用八十四天的海上生活來換。他們差不多要把運氣賣給你了。」
I must not think nonsense, he thought. Luck is a thing that comes in many forms and who can recognize her? I would take some though in any form and pay what they asked. I wish I could see the glow from the lights, he thought. I wish too many things. But that is the thing I wish for now. He tried to settle more comfortably to steer and from his pain he knew he was not dead.
「我不能想這些無謂的事，」他想。「運氣有很多種形式，誰能認識她呢？不過我願意接受任何形式的運氣，並付出他們要求的代價。我希望能看到光亮，」他想。「我希望太多事情了。但是這是我現在最希望的事。」他試著更舒服地坐好，以便掌舵，從他的疼痛中他知道自己還活著。
He saw the reflected glare of the lights of the city at what must have been around ten o’clock at night. They were only perceptible at first as the light is in the sky before the moon rises. Then they were steady to see across the ocean which was rough now with the increasing breeze. He steered inside of the glow and he thought that now, soon, he must hit the edge of the stream.
他看見了城市的燈光反射在水面上，應該是晚上十點鐘左右。起初，燈光只在天空中可見，就像月亮升起前的光輝。然後它們穩定地顯現在海面上，隨著風勢增強，海面變得起伏不定。他朝著光亮的方向駛去，心裡想著，現在不久，他必須抵達水流的邊緣。
Now it is over, he thought. They will probably hit me again. But what can a man do against them in the dark without a weapon?
「現在結束了，」他想。「它們可能會再次襲擊我。但一個人在黑暗中，沒有武器，該怎麼對抗它們？」
He was stiff and sore now and his wounds and all of the strained parts of his body hurt with the cold of the night. I hope I do not have to fight again, he thought. I hope so much I do not have to fight again.
他現在僵硬而疼痛，傷口和身體的每一個緊繃部位都在寒冷的夜裡感到疼痛。「我希望我不必再戰鬥，」他想。「我真希望我不必再戰鬥。」
[117] But by midnight he fought and this time he knew the fight was useless. They came in a pack and he could only see the lines in the water that their fins made and their phosphorescence as they threw themselves on the fish. He clubbed at heads and heard the jaws chop and the shaking of the skiff as they took hold below. He clubbed desperately at what he could only feel and hear and he felt something seize the club and it was gone.
但到了午夜，他又一次戰鬥，這一次他知道這場戰鬥是徒勞的。鯊魚成群而來，他只能看到它們在水中劃出的線條和它們的磷光，當它們撲向魚時。老人揮舞著棍子打向它們的頭，聽到鯊魚的牙齒咬合聲，還有小艇在它們的衝擊下劇烈晃動的聲音。他拼命揮動著，只能感覺和聽見，然後感覺到有什麼東西抓住了他的棍子，棍子便消失了。
He jerked the tiller free from the rudder and beat and chopped with it, holding it in both hands and driving it down again and again. But they were up to the bow now and driving in one after the other and together, tearing off the pieces of meat that showed glowing below the sea as they turned to come once more.
他猛地將舵從舵柄上拔出，雙手握住，反覆揮打著。但鯊魚們已經衝到船首，接連不斷地向他們撲來，一口口地撕扯著水面下閃閃發光的肉塊，然後轉身再次襲來。
One came, finally, against the head itself and he knew that it was over. He swung the tiller across the shark’s head where the jaws were caught in the heaviness of the fish’s head which would not tear. He swung it once and twice and again. He heard the tiller break and he lunged at the shark with the splintered butt. He felt it go in and knowing it was sharp he drove it in again. The shark let go and rolled away. That was the [118] last shark of the pack that came. There was nothing more for them to eat.
終於，有一隻鯊魚直接朝著魚頭衝來，他知道一切結束了。他將舵橫掃過鯊魚的頭部，因為它的下頜被魚的重量卡住，無法撕裂。他揮了第一次、第二次，又一次。他聽到舵斷裂，然後用破損的舵柄朝鯊魚猛刺過去。他感覺到它進去了，知道那是鋒利的，他又用力地插了進去。鯊魚鬆開，翻身游走。這是來襲的最後一隻鯊魚，因為它們已經沒有東西可吃了。
The old man could hardly breathe now and he felt a strange taste in his mouth. It was coppery and sweet and he was afraid of it for a moment. But there was not much of it. He spat into the ocean and said, “Eat that, galanos. And make a dream you’ve killed a man.”
老人幾乎無法呼吸，嘴裡感到一種奇怪的味道。那是金屬般的甜味，讓他一瞬間感到害怕，但並沒有太多的味道。他朝大海吐了一口，說道：「吃吧，galanos。做個夢，夢到你殺死了一個人。」
He knew he was beaten now finally and without remedy and he went back to the stern and found the jagged end of the tiller would fit in the slot of the rudder well enough for him to steer. He settled the sack around his shoulders and put the skiff on her course. He sailed lightly now and he had no thoughts nor any feelings of any kind. He was past everything now and he sailed the skiff to make his home port as well and as intelligently as he could. In the night sharks hit the carcass as someone might pick up crumbs from the table. The old man paid no attention to them and did not pay any attention to anything except steering. He only noticed how lightly and bow well the skiff sailed now there was no great weight beside her.
他知道自己現在徹底失敗，無法挽回，於是回到船尾，發現舵的 jagged 末端可以適合插入舵柄的槽中，這樣他就能操控舵了。他把麻袋固定在肩上，讓小艇走上航道。現在他輕輕地航行，腦中沒有任何想法，也沒有任何感受。他已經超越了一切，努力讓小艇回到自己的港口，以他最聰明的方式航行。在夜裡，鯊魚像有人從桌上撿起碎屑一樣，襲擊著魚的屍體。老人對它們毫不在意，只專心於掌舵。他只注意到小艇航行得多麼輕盈，因為旁邊沒有太大的重量。
[119] She’s good, he thought. She is sound and not harmed in any way except for the tiller. That is easily replaced. He could feel he was inside the current now and he could see the lights of the beach colonies along the shore. He knew where he was now and it was nothing to get home.
「她真好，」他想。「她結實，而且除了舵之外沒有任何損壞。那很容易替換。」他能感覺到自己已經在水流裡，能看到海岸邊度假村的燈光。他現在知道自己身在何處，回家並不難。
The wind is our friend, anyway, he thought. Then he added, sometimes. And the great sea with our friends and our enemies. And bed, he thought. Bed is my friend. Just bed, he thought. Bed will be a great thing. It is easy when you are beaten, he thought. I never knew how easy it was. And what beat you, he thought.
「無論如何，風是我們的朋友，」他想。然後他補充道，有時候。「還有大海，既是我們的朋友也是我們的敵人。還有床，」他想。「床是我的朋友。只是床，」他想。「床將是一件偉大的事情。當你被打敗的時候，一切都變得容易，他想。「我從未知道原來這麼容易。那是什麼讓你被打敗的，」他想。
“Nothing,” he said aloud. “I went out too far.”
「沒什麼，」他大聲說。「我出海太遠了。」
When he sailed into the little harbour the lights of the Terrace were out and he knew everyone was in bed. The breeze had risen steadily and was blowing strongly now. It was quiet in the harbour though and he sailed up onto the little patch of shingle below the rocks. There was no one to help him so he pulled the boat up as far as he could. Then he stepped out and made her fast to a rock.
當他駛入小港口時，露台的燈光已經熄滅，他知道每個人都已經上床睡覺。微風穩步上升，現在吹得很強。港口裡卻很安靜，他駛向岩石下的小碎石灘。沒有人來幫助他，所以他盡量將小艇拉上岸。然後，他下船，將小艇固定在一塊石頭上。
[120] He unstepped the mast and furled the sail and tied it. Then he shouldered the mast and started to climb. It was then he knew the depth of his tiredness. He stopped for a moment and looked back and saw in the reflection from the street light the great tail of the fish standing up well behind the skiff’s stern. He saw the white naked line of his backbone and the dark mass of the head with the projecting bill and all the nakedness between.
他拆下桅杆，捲起帆並綁好。然後他肩負著桅杆，開始攀爬。這時，他才意識到自己疲憊的深度。他停下來，回頭看到路燈的反射中，魚的巨大尾巴清晰地從小艇的船尾高高翹起。他看到他背部裸露的白色脊椎和頭部的黑色塊狀物，以及它之間所有的裸露部分。
He started to climb again and at the top he fell and lay for some time with the mast across his shoulder. He tried to get up. But it was too difficult and he sat there with the mast on his shoulder and looked at the road. A cat passed on the far side going about its business and the old man watched it. Then he just watched the road.
他再次開始攀爬，到了頂端卻摔倒，躺了一段時間，桅杆橫在他的肩膀上。他試圖站起來，但太困難了，他就這樣坐在那裡，肩上扛著桅杆，看著路。遠處有一隻貓經過，忙著自己的事情，老人看著它。然後，他只是靜靜地盯著那條路。
2:20:00
Finally he put the mast down and stood up. He picked the mast up and put it on his shoulder and started up the road. He had to sit down five times before he reached his shack.
最後，他把桅杆放下，站了起來。他將桅杆扛在肩上，開始沿著道路走。在到達小屋之前，他不得不坐下五次。
Inside the shack he leaned the mast against the wall. In the dark he found a water bottle and took a drink. Then he lay down on the bed. He pulled the blanket [121] over his shoulders and then over his back and legs and he slept face down on the newspapers with his arms out straight and the palms of his hands up.
進入小屋後，他將桅杆靠在牆上。在黑暗中，他找到一個水壺，喝了幾口。然後，他躺在床上，把毛毯拉過肩膀，再蓋到背部和腿上，面朝下，雙臂伸直，手掌朝上，沉沉入睡。
He was asleep when the boy looked in the door in the morning. It was blowing so hard that the drifting-boats would not be going out and the boy had slept late and then come to the old man’s shack as he had come each morning. The boy saw that the old man was breathing and then he saw the old man’s hands and he started to cry. He went out very quietly to go to bring some coffee and all the way down the road he was crying.
早晨，男孩來到門口時，他還在睡覺。風刮得很大，漂流的小艇無法出海，男孩睡得很晚，然後像往常一樣來到老人的小屋。男孩看到老人正在呼吸，然後看到老人的手，開始哭了起來。他非常安靜地走出門去，想要去拿咖啡，沿路都在哭。
Many fishermen were around the skiff looking at what was lashed beside it and one was in the water, his trousers rolled up, measuring the skeleton with a length of line.
許多漁民圍著小艇，查看綁在旁邊的東西，其中一個人在水中，褲子捲起來，用一根繩子量測魚骨架。
The boy did not go down. He had been there before and one of the fishermen was looking after the skiff for him. “How is he?” one of the fishermen shouted. “Sleeping,” the boy called. He did not care that they saw him crying. “Let no one disturb him.” “He was eighteen feet from nose to tail,” the fisherman who was measuring him called.
男孩沒有下去。他以前來過，那裡有一個漁民正在幫他照看小艇。“他怎麼樣？”一位漁民喊道。“還在睡，”男孩回答。他不在乎他們看到自己哭。“別讓任何人打擾他。” “從鼻子到尾巴他有十八尺長，”正在量測的漁民喊道。
[122] “I believe it,” the boy said.
“我相信，”男孩說。
He went into the Terrace and asked for a can of coffee. “Hot and with plenty of milk and sugar in it.” “Anything more?”
他走進露台，點了一罐咖啡。“要熱的，加很多牛奶和糖。” “還要其他的嗎？”
“No. Afterwards I will see what he can eat.”
“不。之後我會看看他能吃什麼。”
“What a fish it was,” the proprietor said. “There has never been such a fish. Those were two fine fish you took yesterday too.” “Damn my fish,” the boy said and he started to cry again.
“那是一條多麼大的魚，”店主說。“從來沒有過這樣的魚。你昨天抓的兩條魚也很不錯。” “該死的魚，”男孩說，然後又開始哭了起來。
“Do you want a drink of any kind?” the proprietor asked.
“你想喝點什麼嗎？”店主問。
“No,” the boy said. “Tell them not to bother Santiago. I’ll be back.” “Tell him how sorry I am.”
“不，”男孩說。“告訴他們別打擾聖地亞哥。我馬上回來。” “告訴他我有多麼抱歉。”
“Thanks,” the boy said.
“謝謝，”男孩說。
The boy carried the hot can of coffee up to the old man’s shack and sat by him until he woke. Once it looked as though he were waking. But he had gone back into heavy sleep and the boy had gone across the road to borrow some wood to heat the coffee.
男孩將熱咖啡罐帶回老人的小屋，坐在他身邊，直到他醒來。曾經看起來他快醒了，但他又回到了沉重的睡眠中。男孩便過馬路去借一些木材來加熱咖啡。
Finally the old man woke.
最後，老人醒了。
[123] “Don’t sit up,” the boy said. “Drink this.”
“別坐起來，”男孩說。“喝這個。”
He poured some of the coffee in a glass.
他將一些咖啡倒入玻璃杯中。  
The old man took it and drank it.
老人接過來，喝了一口。  
“They beat me, Manolin,” he said. “They truly beat me.”
“他們打敗了我，馬諾林，”他說。“他們真的打敗了我。”  
“He didn’t beat you. Not the fish.”
“不是魚打敗你。”  
“No. Truly. It was afterwards.”
“不。真的。是之後。”  
“Pedrico is looking after the skiff and the gear. What do you want done with the head?”
“佩德里科在照看小艇和裝備。你想怎麼處理魚頭？”  
“Let Pedrico chop it up to use in fish traps.”
“讓佩德里科把它切碎，用於魚籠。”  
“And the spear?”
“那矛呢？”  
“You keep it if you want it.”
“如果你想要，就留給你。”  
“I want it,” the boy said. “Now we must make our plans about the other things.” 
“我想要，”男孩說。“現在我們得對其他的事情做些計畫。”  
“Did they search for me?”
“他們有找過我嗎？”  
“Of course. With coast guard and with planes.”
“當然。沿著海岸有海巡和飛機在找。”  
“The ocean is very big and a skiff is small and hard to see,” the old man said. He noticed how pleasant it was to have someone to talk to instead of speaking only to himself and to the sea. “I missed you,” he said. “What did you catch?” 
“海洋很大，小艇又小，難以被看見，”老人說。他注意到有個人可以交談，讓他覺得多麼愉快，而不是只對自己和大海說話。“我想你了，”他說。“你捕到什麼？”  
“One the first day. One the second and two the third.”
“第一天捕到一條，第二天一條，第三天兩條。”  
[124] “Very good.”
“很好。”  
“Now we fish together again.”
“現在我們再次一起釣魚。”  
“No. I am not lucky. I am not lucky anymore.”
“不。我沒有運氣。我已經沒有運氣了。”  
“The hell with luck,” the boy said. “I’ll bring the luck with me.”
“去他的運氣，”男孩說。“我會把運氣帶來。”  
“What will your family say?”
“你家人會怎麼說？”  
“I do not care. I caught two yesterday. But we will fish together now for I still have much to learn.”
“我不在乎。我昨天捕到兩條。但現在我們要一起釣魚，因為我還有很多要學。”  
“We must get a good killing lance and always have it on board. You can make the blade from a spring leaf from an old Ford. We can grind it in Guanabacoa. It should be sharp and not tempered so it will break. My knife broke.”
“我們必須有一根好的殺魚矛，並且隨時帶在船上。你可以用舊福特的彈簧葉製作刀片。我們可以在瓜納巴科亞磨利。它應該鋒利，但不要淬火，這樣才不會斷。我那把刀斷了。”  
“I’ll get another knife and have the spring ground.” 
“我會再找一把刀，然後把彈簧磨好。”  
How many days of heavy brisa have we?”
“我們有幾天的強風？” 
“Maybe three. Maybe more.”
 “也許三天。也許更多。” 
“I will have everything in order,” the boy said. “You get your hands well old man.”
 “我會把一切準備好，”男孩說。“你快點讓手傷好，老爺子。”
2:24:53
“I know how to care for them. In the night I spat something strange and felt something in my chest was broken.” 
“我知道怎麼照顧他們。昨晚我吐出了一些奇怪的東西，感覺胸口有什麼地方斷了。” 
“Get that well too,” the boy said. “Lie down, old man, and I will bring you your clean shirt. And something to eat.”
“也要把那個治好，”男孩說。“躺下，老爺子，我去給你帶乾淨的襯衫，還有些吃的。” 
[125] “Bring any of the papers of the time that I was gone,” the old man said.
“把我不在時的報紙帶來，”老人說。  
“You must get well fast for there is much that I can learn and you can teach me everything. How much did you suffer?”
“你必須快點康復，因為我還有很多可以學的東西，而你可以教我一切。你受了多少苦？” 
 “Plenty,” the old man said.
“很多，”老人說。 
“I’ll bring the food and the papers,” the boy said. “Rest well, old man. I will bring stuff from the drugstore for your hands.”
“我去拿食物和報紙，”男孩說。“好好休息，老爺子。我還會從藥店帶些東西給你的手。”  
“Don’t forget to tell Pedrico the head is his.”
“別忘了告訴佩德里科，魚頭是他的。” 
“No. I will remember.”
“我會記得的。”  
As the boy went out the door and down the worn coral rock road he was crying again.
男孩走出門，沿著磨損的珊瑚石路下去，又開始哭了。
That afternoon there was a party of tourists at the Terrace and looking down in the water among the empty beer cans and dead barracudas a woman saw a great long white spine with a huge tail at the end that lifted and swung with the tide while the east wind blew a heavy steady sea outside the entrance to the harbour.
那天下午，露台上有一群遊客，當他們往水中看時，看到空啤酒罐和死掉的梭子魚中，一位女士看到了一根巨大的白色脊椎骨，尾巴很大，隨著潮水升降擺動，東風在港口入口外吹著穩重的海浪。
“What’s that?” she asked a waiter and pointed to the long backbone of the great fish that was now just garbage waiting to go out with the tide.
“那是什麼？”她問一位服務生，並指著這根大魚的長脊骨，現在就像垃圾一樣，正等待著隨著潮水沖走。  
“Tiburon,” the waiter said. “Shark.” He was meaning to explain what had happened. “I didn’t know sharks had such handsome, beautifully formed tails.”
“提布龍，”服務生說。“鯊魚。” 他想要解釋發生了什麼事。“我不知道鯊魚的尾巴這麼好看，這麼漂亮。” 
“I didn’t either,” her male companion said.
“我也不知道，”她的男伴說。
Up the road, in his shack, the old man was sleeping again. He was still sleeping on his face and the boy was sitting by him watching him. The old man was dreaming about the lions.
在路上，老人在他的茅屋裡又睡著了。他還是趴著睡，男孩坐在他旁邊看著他。老人夢見獅子。 
THE END.
**完**
2:26:52
