CHAPTER I.Down the Rabbit-Hole
第一章 鑽進兔子洞
Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do.
愛麗絲陪著她姐姐閑坐在河邊上沒有事做，坐得好不耐煩。
Once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it.
她有時候偷偷地瞧她姐姐看的是什麼書，可是書裡又沒有畫兒，又沒有說話。
"And what is the use of a book," thought Alice "without pictures or conversations?"
她就想道，“一本書裡又沒有畫兒，又沒有說話，那樣書要它幹什麼呢？”
So she was considering in her own mind,
所以她就無精打采地自己在心裡盤算——
(as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid),
（她也不過勉強地醒著，因為這熱天熱得她昏昏地要睡）——
whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies,
到底是做一枝野菊花圈兒好呢？還是為著這種玩意兒不值得站起來去找花的麻煩呢？
when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.
她正在納悶的時候，忽然來了一隻淡紅眼睛的白兔子，在她旁邊跑過。
There was nothing so very remarkable in that;
就是看見一隻淡紅眼睛的白兔子，本來也不是件怎麼大了不得的事情，
nor did Alice think it so very much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, “Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be late!”
並且就是愛麗絲聽見那兔子自言自語地說，“曖呀，啊噫呀！我一定要去晚了！”
(when she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural);
（事後想起來她才覺得這是應當詫異的事，不過當時她覺得樣樣事情都像很平常似的）；
but when the Rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet,
但是等到那兔子當真在它背心袋裡摸出一隻表來，看了一看時候，連忙又往前走，愛麗絲想道，“那不行！”登時就站了起來，
for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it,
因為愛麗絲心裡忽然記得她從來沒有見過兔子有背心袋的，並且有只表可以從袋裡摸出來的。
and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it,
她忍不住了好奇的心，就緊追著那兔子，快快地跑過一片田場，
and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.
剛剛趕得上看見它從一個籬笆底下的一個大洞裡鑽進去。
In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how in the world she was to get out again.
不管三七二十八，愛麗絲立刻就跟進洞去，再也不想想這輩子怎麼能再出來。
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way,
那個兔子洞先一段是一直往前的，
and then dipped suddenly down, 
到了一個地方，忽然直住下拐，
so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well. 
下去的那麼快，愛麗絲跑地又那麼急，連想停都沒來得及想也就順著洞往一個好像很深的深井裡掉了下去。
Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly,
那口井要不是非常地深，那就定是她掉得很慢，
for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next.
何以呢？因為她掉了半天還掉不完，倒有工夫四面望望；還有空自己問問，“等一會兒又有什麼來了，等一會兒要碰見什麼了？”
First, she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything;
她先還往下瞧瞧，要看看到底等會兒會掉在什麼上頭，可是底下漆黑的，什麼都看不見；
then she looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves;
於是乎她就回頭瞧瞧井壁的四周，看見都是些櫃子和書架子；
here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.
有時候又看見這裡那裡有些地圖和畫掛在釘子上。
She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was labelled “ORANGE MARMALADE”, but to her great disappointment it was empty:
她經過一個架子的時候就伸手把一個小瓶子拿了出來；瓶上寫的是“橙子瑪瑪醬”，可是裡頭都空了，好個失望；
she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.
她不肯把瓶扔掉，因為怕掉到底下去砸死了人，所以想法子等再經過底下一個櫃口，巧巧的把它又放了進去。
“Well!” thought Alice to herself, 
“啊！”愛麗絲自己想道，
“after such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs! “
我摔過了這麼一大回跤，那再從梯子上滾下去可算不得什麼事啦！
How brave they’ll all think me at home! 
家裡他們一定看我膽子真好大啦！
Why, I wouldn’t say anything about it, even if I fell off the top of the house!” 
哼，哪怕我從房頂上掉下來，我也會一句都不提的！”
(Which was very likely true.) 
(這倒怕猜得不錯，那樣摔下來，自然不做聲了！)
Down, down, down. 
掉啊，掉啊，掉啊！
Would the fall never come to an end? 
這一跤怎麼一輩子摔不完了嗎！
“I wonder how many miles I’ve fallen by this time?” she said aloud. 
她出聲道，“我不曉得現在幾了？
“I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. 
我準知道我現下是掉到地球的當心了。
Let me see: that would be four thousand miles down, I think—” 
讓我想想看：那是有四千英里深呢，我想有呢？
(for, you see, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) 
——————你想這些事情是愛麗絲從學堂裡學著背的，現在可惜沒有人在旁邊聽著誇她，都白說掉了，可是練練說說也好——————
“—yes, that’s about the right distance—but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I’ve got to?” 
“是啊，是差不多這麼遠——————但是我的緯度是多少啊？我的經度到了哪兒嘞？
(Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.) 
(其實愛麗絲一點兒也不懂得緯度是什麼件東西，經度是怎麼回事，但是她想那兩個名詞說在嘴裡一定很好聽的。)
Presently she began again. 
一會兒她又說話了。
“I wonder if I shall fall right through the earth! 
她道，“我倒不知道會不會一直掉穿了地球膽，那怎麼呢？
How funny it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward! 
掉到那邊，遇見了許多倒著站的人，一定很好玩兒！
The Antipathies, I think—” 
叫倒豬世界，不是嗎？
(she was rather glad there was no one listening, this time, as it didn’t sound at all the right word) 
——————她這回倒覺得幸虧沒有人聽著，因為她想不起來書裡那個“倒足世界”的名字，又覺“倒豬世界”又不大象——————
“—but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know. “
但是你想我不是得要問他們貴國的名字叫什麼嗎？
Please, Ma’am, is this New Zealand or Australia?” 
請問，女士，這是新西蘭啊，還是澳大利亞啊？
(and she tried to curtsey as she spoke—fancy curtseying as you’re falling through the air! 
(說著就一頭向空中請安——————你想想看，在半空中一頭往下掉，一頭又要請安，
Do you think you could manage it?) 
你能辦得到嗎？)
“And what an ignorant little girl she’ll think me for asking!
“可是要這樣問，他們一定把我當個傻孩子，連自己在什麼國裡都會不知道。
No, it’ll never do to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.” 
不行，這個一定不好意思向人的；或者我會看見在哪兒牆上或是柱上寫著：這是新西蘭或者這是澳大利亞。
Down, down, down. 
掉下去呀！掉下去呀！掉下去呀！
There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began talking again. 
愛麗絲又沒有別的事做，所以又自己咕咕叨叨地說話玩。
“Dinah’ll miss me very much tonight, I should think!” 
“啊呀，我猜今兒晚上我的黛那一定要想我嘞！”
(Dinah was the cat.)
 (黛那是她的貓。)
“I hope they’ll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. 
我盼望他們開晚茶的時候，會記得黛那的牛奶。
Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! 
我的乖黛那呀，我真想現在跟你在一塊兒呀！
There are no mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that’s very like a mouse, you know. 
可是我怕半空中沒有耗子，那末捉個蝙蝠子也好，蝙蝠子同耗子也是差不多的，黛那，你想可不是嗎？
But do cats eat bats, I wonder?” 
但是我倒不曉得？貓吃蝙蝠子不吃的？”
And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, 
愛麗絲覺得有點困得慌了，就自言自語地半醒半夢地咕叨，
“Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?” and sometimes, “Do bats eat cats?” 
“貓子吃蝙蝠子嗎？貓子吃蝙蝠子嗎？”有時候說說說亂了，變成“蝙子吃貓蝠子嗎？吃子蝙貓蝠子嗎？”
for, you see, as she couldn’t answer either question, it didn’t much matter which way she put it. 
你想她橫豎答不出來這話，所以順著問，倒著問也還不是一樣。
She felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, “Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?” 
她覺得好像睡著了。才夢見和黛那手挽手地同行，正在那裡很懇切地問她，“你來，黛那，告訴我老實話：你到底曾經吃過蝙蝠子沒有？”
when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over. 
正說著那時間忽然地撲通！撲通！她身子一掉，掉在一大堆樹枝子和幹葉子上，這一跤就此跌完了。
Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: 
愛麗絲一點都沒有跌痛，馬上一跳就站了起來：
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; 
她回頭往上頭瞧瞧，都是漆黑的；
before her was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. 
她前面又是一條長夾道，還看見前頭那個白兔子順著那條道快快地走。
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, “Oh my ears and whiskers, how late it’s getting!” 
那是一刻也不能緩；嗖地像一陣風似的愛麗絲也跟著跑去了，恰恰來得及聽得那兔子在轉角上說“乖乖！真該扯我的耳朵鬍子啦，這多晚呀！”
She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: 
那兔子轉彎的時候，她追上得已經很近，但是她自己一到了那個角上，那兔子可就不見了：
she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof. 
她覺得走進了一間長而低的廳房，頂上掛著一長排的燈盞：
There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; 
廳的兩面都有門，但是門都是鎖的；
and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, 
愛麗絲沿著一邊走下去，再沿著那邊走回來，一個一個門都試過來，一個也開不開，
she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again. 
她就愁著臉走回到當中，不曉得怎麼再能有出去的日子。
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; 
忽然間她發現一個三腳的桌子，全是玻璃磚做的；
there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice’s first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; 
桌上沒有別的東西，就是一個小小的金鑰匙，愛麗絲第一個念頭就是想這把鑰匙在那些門上許有一個配得上的；
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. 
可是真倒楣！不是鎖太大，就是鑰匙太小，無論怎樣，試了一周，一個也開不開。
However, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: 
可是再第二回試的時候，她看見了一個上回沒有看見的低簾子，簾子後頭有一個小門，只不過一尺多高。
she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted! 
她把那金鑰匙放在鎖裡試試，果然真配得上，好個高興呀！
Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rat-hole:
愛麗絲就把那小門開開，看見裡頭有一條小道通進去，只不過象老鼠洞那麼大小：
she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
她跪了下來，側著頭往裡頭一瞧，唉呀，好一個可愛的小花園兒呀！
How she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the doorway;
她真想能走出這間大暗廳，走到那些鮮花清泉裡遊玩。可是那小門裡她連頭亦都鑽不進去，
“and even if my head would go through,” thought poor Alice, “it would be of very little use without my shoulders.
而且愛麗絲想道，“就是我的頭鑽了進去，要是沒有肩膀子，那也不見得有什麼大用處。
Oh, how I wish I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin.”
唉，我願意我會像個望遠鏡似的，一縮就縮小，那就好啦！我想我會的，只要有誰教我怎麼樣起頭，我就會的。”
For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.
你想，愛麗絲近來遇見了這麼些出奇的事情，她簡直覺得天下沒有真做不到的事情了。
There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes:
白等著在那個小門那裡，似乎沒有什麼好處，所以她又走回桌子那裡，一半也希望再找著一個別的鑰匙，不然或者也許找到一本什麼書，裡頭有教人怎麼像望遠鏡似的變小的訣竅：
this time she found a little bottle on it, (“which certainly was not here before,” said Alice,)
這會她找到一個瓶子（“我剛才一定是沒看見在那兒的，”愛麗絲說，）
and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words “DRINK ME,” beautifully printed on it in large letters.
瓶頸上系著一個紙條子，上頭寫著很好看的大字“喝我。
”It was all very well to say “Drink me,” but the wise little Alice was not going to do that in a hurry.
說“喝我”還不好嗎？但是那個聰明的小愛麗絲決不會這樣地冒失。
“No, I’ll look first,” she said, “and see whether it’s marked ‘poison’ or not”;
她說，“我不！我要先看看瓶上有沒有毒藥的字樣在上再說，”
for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, 
因為她曾經在書裡看過好幾件好故事，講小孩子們怎樣不乖就燙了手，
and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things,
怎麼被野獸吃掉，還有別的可怕的事情，
all because they would not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them:
都是因為他們總不肯記得大人交代的幾條很簡單的規矩：
such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds;
例如，你要把紅的火筷子捏得太長久，手就會覺得太燙的；假如弄刀的時候把刀口弄到皮裡太深了，就會有血出來的；
and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked “poison,” it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.
她再也不忘記有一條規矩說，假如你把上面寫著“毒藥”字樣的瓶子裡的水喝的稍微太多了一點，那就早晚總會覺得那水于你不大相宜的。
However, this bottle was not marked “poison,” so Alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.
然而這一回瓶子上並沒有“毒藥”的字樣在上，所以愛麗絲就大著膽嘗他一嘗。那味兒倒很好吃（有點像櫻桃餅，又有點像雞蛋糕，有點像菠蘿蜜，又有點像烤火雞，有點像冰淇淋，又有點像芝麻醬），所以一會兒工夫就唏哩呼嚕地喝完了。
“What a curious feeling!” said Alice; “I must be shutting up like a telescope.”
“我身上覺得好古怪，我一定做望遠鏡似的變小了。”
And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
果不其然：她現在不到一尺高了，她臉上登時就現出喜色，因為她就想到現在她的大小正好可以走進那個花園的小門了。
First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,” said Alice to herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be like then?”
但是她先等幾分鐘看看她自己還再縮不再縮：她對這層到有點擔心，她道，“也許我會盡縮縮到沒有了，如同吹滅了的蠟燭的火苗一樣，那時候我倒不知道覺得象什麼了？”
And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.
她說著就想摹擬一個吹滅了的蠟燭的火苗的樣子，可是想了半天也想不出來，因為她記得從來沒有見過這麼件東西。
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it:
等了一會兒，確實知道了沒有出什麼別的事，她就打定主意到花園裡去。但是可憐的愛麗絲呀！她走到那小門跟前，才想起剛才把那小金鑰匙忘記在桌上了，她回頭走到桌子那兒，又太矮了，再也夠不到桌子的上面：
she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.
她從那透明的玻璃桌子底下，清清楚楚看見那鑰匙擺在桌上，她就極力地想從一個桌子腿上爬上去，但是那玻璃真滑，再也上不去；左試右試爬的又累又沒法子，那可憐的孩子就坐在地上哭了起來。
“Come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said Alice to herself, rather sharply; “I advise you to leave off this minute!”
12愛麗絲一邊哭著一邊自己又說道，“別哭啊，你這孩子，哭它有什麼用？我勸你即刻就住聲！別哭！”
She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
她平常自己常勸自己很好的勸話（可是很少聽她自己的勸），有時候她罵自己罵得厲害到眼淚都罵出來了。有一回她因為自己玩槌球的時候欺騙了自己，就打她自己的耳光，這個奇怪的孩子最愛裝做兩個人。
“But it’s no use now,” thought poor Alice, “to pretend to be two people! Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make one respectable person!”
“但是現在還裝什麼兩個人呢？”愛麗絲道，“唉！剩下這麼點兒我，連一個像樣兒的人都不夠做了！”
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words “EAT ME” were beautifully marked in currants.
不久一會兒她又看見桌子底下放著一個小玻璃匣子：她打開它一看，裡頭是一塊小糕，上頭有葡萄乾做成很好看的字樣，說“吃我。”
“Well, I’ll eat it,” said Alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I’ll get into the garden, and I don’t care which happens!”
愛麗絲道，“好，我就吃它，假如吃了它我會長大，我就好夠到那把鑰匙；假如吃了會縮小，我就好打門底下的縫兒裡鑽進去；所以無論哪樣我總歸可以進去就是，變大變小我都不在乎！”
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, “Which way? Which way?”, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size:
所以她就吃了一小塊，自己急著問道，“往哪一邊？往哪一邊，長嘞嗎？縮嘞嗎？”把手就捂著頭上，摸摸還是往上還是往下，她真好詫異，怎麼半天又不長大，又不縮小，還是那樣大小：
to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.
固然說起來呢，平常人吃了糕的時候，也不過是這樣子的，但是愛麗絲遇見慣了這麼些出奇出怪的事情，她竟覺得假如事情都是樣樣照常的那就又笨又無味了。
So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.
所以她就正正經經地一口一口地把那塊糕都吃完了。
